                       Coastally Trapped Waves Experiment
                          NCAR C-130 - Project #6-110
                              Data Quality Report
                                       by
                                 Allen Schanot


     This summary has been written to outline basic instrumentation
problems affecting the data set and is not intended to point out every
bit of questionable data.  It is hoped that this information will
facilitate use of the data as the research concentrates on specific
flights and times.

     The following report covers only the RAF-supplied instrumentation
and is organized into two sections.  The first section lists recurring
problems, general limitations, and systematic biases in the standard
RAF measurements.  The second section lists isolated problems
occurring on a flight-by-flight basis.  A discussion of the
performance of the SABL lidar and dropsonde systems will be provided
separately, as will the respective data sets.


Section I:  General Discussion

     1.  The wind data for this project were derived from
measurements taken with the radome wind gust package.  As is the
case with all wind gust systems, the ambient wind calculations
can be adversely affected by either sharp changes in the
aircraft's flight attitude or excessive drift in the onboard
inertial reference system (IRS).  Turns, or more importantly,
climbing turns are particularly disruptive to this type of
measurement technique.  Wind data reported for these conditions
should be used with caution.
     Special sets of in-flight calibration maneuvers were conducted on
flights TF02 and RF03 to aid in the performance analysis of the
wind gust measurements.  The calibration data identified a
systematic bias in the pitch and sideslip parameters.  These
offsets have been removed from the final data set.  All of the
remaining information, including the summary of IRS performance,
indicated that the wind measurement system was performing within
standard RAF specifications.  The time intervals for each set of
maneuvers have been documented in both the flight-by-flight data
quality review and on the individual Research Flight Forms
prepared for each flight.  
     As an additional enhancement to this data set, a second-pass
correction was applied to the wind data using position and ground
speed updates provided by the GPS positioning system.  Both the
GPS-corrected and uncorrected values are included in the final
data set.  RAF strongly recommends that the GPS-corrected winds
be used for all research efforts.
     Two sets of vertical winds were also calculated (WI,XWIC).  The
two parameters are calculated using different aircraft vertical
velocities.  During the straight-and-level flux legs, the XWIC
value will be significantly better.  WI will provide better
results when the aircraft is manuevering, such as the sawtooth
profiles.

     2.  A Trimble Global Positioning System (GPS) was used as a
more accurate position reference during the program.  The system
performed extremely well, and the GPS position values should be
used for all research efforts.

     3.  RAF flies redundant sensors to assure data quality.  
Performance characteristics differ from sensor to sensor with
certain units being more susceptible to various thermal and
dynamic effects than others.  Good comparisons were typically
obtained between the three standard temperatures (ATRL, ATRR,
ATWH), two dynamic pressures (QCRC, QCFC), two liquid water
sensors (PLWCC, PLWCC1), and the two dew pointers (DPT,DPB). 
Exceptions are noted in the flight-by-flight summary.  The
differences observed in the static pressures (PSFDC,PSFC) were
typical for this type of project with the Model 1201 pressure
transducer (PSFC) exhibiting its normal temperature sensitivity. 
The reference pressure used in all of the derived parameters
(PSFDC) was obtained with a Model 1501 unit which was unaffected
by these problems.  The two remote surface temperature sensors
(RSTB, RSTB1) generally functioned well, but there were times
when the two measurements differ significantly.

     4.  Temperature measurements were made using the standard
heated (ATWH) and unheated (ATRR,ATRL) Rosemount temperature
sensors.  All of these standard temperature sensors performed
reasonably well, encountering the usual problems with sensor
wetting during cloud passes.  ATRR also experienced a certain
amount of radio frequency interference (RFI) during broadcasts by
the flight crew.  ATRL and ATWH remained unaffected by this
problem.  A comparison of the data sets yielded good correlations
in instrument signatures and only small differences in absolute
value (+-0.2 oC) throughout the program.   A comparison of pre-
and post-program calibrations indicated that all units maintained
stable and independent calibrations.  Due to its reliability and
the lack of RFI interference, ATRL was selected as the reference
value used in calculating the derived parameters.  

     5.  Humidity measurements were made using two collocated
thermoelectric dew point sensors and two Lyman-alpha fast-response
hygrometers.  Generally speaking, the humidity sensors performed well. 
     As is typically the case, the two dew point sensors (DPBC, DPTC)
were set up differently to provide the best coverage under the widest
range of ambient conditions.  DPBC was set up for fast response, but
its dynamic range was more limited.  DPTC was a little slower but had
the capability of measuring greater dew point depressions.  DPTC, however,
showed a tenancy to overshoot on rapid humidity changes.  DPTC also
experienced a certain amount of radio frequency interference (RFI)
during broadcasts by the flight crew.  DPBC remained mostly unaffected
by this problem and was therefore selected as the reference sensor.
A comparison of the data sets yielded good correlations in instrument
signatures during the largest portions of the flights when both
instruments were functioning normally.
     Lyman-alpha hygrometers are susceptible to in-flight drift
in the instrument's bias voltage.  Due to this problem, RAF uses
a special data processing technique to remove the bias drift by
referencing the long-term humidity values to one of the more
stable thermoelectric dew point sensors.  Measurements from the
two systems remained well correlated for clear air sampling but
showed significant differences during cloud penetrations.  The
two Lyman-alpha hygrometers used different housing types.  The
stub unit (MRLA1, RHOLA1) tends to be slightly faster but is more
susceptible to in-cloud wetting and thermal drift.  The cross-
flow unit (MRLA, RHOLA) is therefore recommended as the reference
sensor.  

     6.  A set of upward- and downward-facing radiometers were
used to measure shortwave, ultraviolet, and infrared irradiance. 
It should be noted that all units are hard-mounted and that none
of the data have been corrected for changes in the aircraft's
flight attitude.  Care should be used in identifying the aircraft
attitude to determine a relative sun angle.  

     7.  Thermal temperature chamber experiments have indicated
that the Heimann sensors used to remotely measure the surface
temperature (RSTB, RSTB1) are sensitive to some thermal drift.   
In an attempt to deal with these problems the units were equipped
with a temperature-control heater system.  Generally speaking,
the heater system stabilized the signal fairly well.  Some drift
is still apparent in the data set.  RSTB1 seemed to be the more
stable of the two units and exhibited better accuracy in the
regular, single-point, precision tests run prior to each flight.
RSTB1 is therefore recommended as the reference system for this
measurement.

     8.  The altitude of the aircraft was measured in several
ways.  The primary measurement (PALT) is derived from the static
pressure using the hydrostatic equation and the U.S. Standard
Atmosphere, which assumes a constant surface pressure of 1013 mbar. 
The inertial reference system outputs a similar measurement of
altitude (ALT) by combining static pressure measurements with
vertical accelerations.  These outputs are well correlated and
either may be used.  RAF recommends PALT as the reference value,
however, as it is typically a cleaner signal and uses the
research grade static pressure sensor.
     A radar altimeter (HGM232) was on board the aircraft for
the project.  This unit works well at altitudes of 900 meters or
less.  The digital output of the unit takes over above this
altitude and introduces intermittant spikes into the data set. 
Due to the errors in PALT & ALT introduced by using the standard
atmosphere, HGM232 should be used as the low altitude reference.
     The GPS positioning system also provides an altitude readout
(GALT).  The GALT signal has been "detuned" by the military and
exhibits erratic oscillations of +-100 M.  

     9.  Two hot-wire liquid-water sensors were used on the C-130
during the program.  The PMS King Probes (PLWCC, PLWCC1) worked
extremely well.  A comparison of the two units yielded a good
correlation in instrument signatures and only small differences
in absolute value throughout the program.  Special note should
be made of the fact that both these instruments are calibrated
for a specific range of aircraft speeds.  Small changes in the
baseline are apparent with speed changes, as are small zero
offsets.  Each cloud penetration will require a baseline
adjustment with the relative change providing the sampled
liquid water content.
     Due to the nature of this sampling technique, it should be
clear that water contained in ice particles will not be observed. 
This fact should be taken into account when comparing data from
these sensors with the calculated liquid water content obtained
from the optical particle probes.

    10.   The calculation of CN sized aerosol particle
concentrations (CONCN) is dependent upon total particle counts
(CNTS) and the measurement of sample flow (FCN, FCNC).  Droplet
shattering during cloud penetrations sharply increases the number
of counts and can falsely increase indicated CN concentrations by
several orders of magnitude.  Sample flows are routinely corrected
for altitude changes, but obstructions are possible.  If there are
any questions about segments of the CONCN data, the flows should
be examined.

   11.  Six PMS particle probes (FSSP100, FSSP300, 2D-C, 2D-P,
PCASP, 260X) were used on the project at different times.  Some
specific details on each of the probes are summarized below:

          PCASP -  Basically this unit failed to function
          properly and was exchanged with the FSSP300 probe
          following flight RF03.  None of these data have been
          included in the data set.

          FSSP100 -  The FSSP cloud droplet probe functioned
          extremely well early in the  project.  With the
          problems encountered with the PCASP probe, the FSSP
          probe was switched to cover the aerosol size range. 
               An electrical surge of some sort took this probe out
          of service during flight RF06.  Repairs were not possible,
          and the data from this probe are bad for the remaining
          flights. 

          FSSP300 - The FSSP aerosol probe covers a range of
          particle sizes that bridges the gap between the true
          aerosols and the smaller droplets.  The unit fuctioned
          extremely well after flight RF04 when it was mounted on
          the aircraft.  Like all 1D optical probes, however, the
          FSSP300 has no way to distinguish between aerosols, ice
          or water.  
               Note: The bin sizes vary significanly in the particle
          sizing routines for this probe..

          260X - The 260X precipitation probe has a tendency to
          be noisy in the first few bins.  Generally speaking,
          concentrations from the 260X and 2D-C probes were 
          well correlated.  However, sporadic spiking did occur
          during many of the cloud passes.  Care should therefore
          be used when interpreting these data.  
               An electrical surge of some sort took this probe out
          of service during flight RF06.  Repairs were not possible,
          and the data from this probe are bad for the remaining
          flights. 

          2D-C/2D-P - Both of the two-dimensional imaging probes
          performed extremely well throughout the program.  Due
          to the special nature of the 2D data set, only the
          digital computations of droplet concentrations have
          been included in the general data set.  The actual
          image data have been archived separately.  Access to
          the images will require the use of specialized software
          routines that may necessitate direct assistance from
          the RAF staff.

    12. The TECO Model 49 ozone analyser is a slow-response
instrument which provides 10-second-averaged values.  The
corrected output (TEO3C) has been adjusted for variations in
sample pressure (TEP) and temperature (TET).  Generally the
instrument performed well.  Intermittent spikes do occur but are
fairly isolated and obvious to any user.

   13.  Data recording typically begins well in advance of the
actual aircraft takeoff time.  Virtually all measurements made on
the aircraft require some sort of airspeed correction, or the
systems are simply not active while the aircraft remains on the
ground.  None of the data collected while the aircraft is on the
ground should be considered as valid.

     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    

Section II:  Flight-by-Flight Summary


RF01 Excessive drift in Inertial Reference System (IRS) due to
     ground power glitch.  GPS-corrected winds remove error.

     Bottom ultraviolet radiometer failure (UVT).  Data bad from
     18:48 - 26:45 CUT.

     PMS PCASP probe data bad for whole flight.


RF02 Uncharacteristic response in heated Rosemount temperature
     (ATWH).  Data bad from 16:20-16:26 CUT.

     Bottom dew pointer (DPB) beyond OPS range from 16:46-17:26 CUT.
     Intermittent response errors from 20:26-25:27 CUT.

     Moisture likely in top dew pointer head (DPT).  Response 
     questionable throughout flight.  Use MRLA as humidity
     reference.

     Excessive drift in remote surface temperature (RSTB).  Data 
     questionable from 17:44-20:44 CUT.

     PMS PCASP probe data bad for whole flight.


RF03 Moisture problems in DPT.  Response questionable throughout
     flight.

     DPB balanced in flight.  Data bad from 23:50-23:58 CUT.

     Calibration manuevers conducted from 25:06-25:21 CUT.

     PMS PCASP probe data bad for whole flight.


RF04 Bottom dew pointer (DPB) beyond OPS range from 16:14-17:00 and
     22:06-22:24 CUT.
     
     DPT balanced in flight.  Data bad from 16:20-16:30 and 
     17:33-17:42 CUT.

     Intermittent wetting of alternate Lyman-alpha sensor (MRLA1)
     during cloud passes.

     PMS PCASP probe data bad for whole flight.


RF05 PMS PCASP probe replaced with PMS FSSP300 probe.

     UVB intermittent throughout flight.



RF06 Bottom dew pointer (DPB) beyond OPS range from 22:34-23:05 CUT.
     
     Intermittent wetting of alternate Lyman-alpha sensor (MRLA1)
     during cloud passes.

     UVB intermittent throughout flight.

     Electrical surge caused failure of right pod DSM and all 
     three PMS-1D probes (FSSP100, FSSP300, 260X).  Data bad 
     from 21:38-23:16 CUT.


RF07 No PMS 1-D probes available for this flight.

     Data gap from 19:01:53-19:13:03 CUT due to ADS system crash.

     Excessive drift in MRLA1 at times during flight.


RF08 PMS FSSP100 & 260X probes not available for flight.

     Data gap from 16:47:00-19:47:36 CUT due to operator error.

     Intermittent spikes in PMS FSSP300 particle concentrations
     (CONC3_RPI).


RF09 PMS FSSP100 & 260X probes not available for flight.

     Bottom dew pointer (DPB) beyond OPS range from 25:10-25:41 CUT.

     Intermittent spikes in ozone concentration (TEO3C) from
     18:12-18:25 CUT.


RF10 PMS FSSP100 & 260X probes not available for flight.

     Numerous intermittent spikes in ozone concentration (TEO3C)
     from 23:29-26:16 CUT.


RF11 PMS FSSP100 & 260X probes not available for flight.

     Numerous intermittent spikes in ozone concentration (TEO3C)
     throughout flight.

     
     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    
