                                        3 September 1996


#6-110
Dr. David Rogers    


Dear David:   

     Enclosed is the final documentation for the airborne
measurements performed with the C-130 during the Coastally Trapped
Waves Experiment from 1 June - 1 July 1996.  Both the LRT (1 sps)
and HRT (25 sps) data sets are now available.  You will soon be
receiving a full data set on magnetic tape.  Access is also possible
through Anonymous FTP.  A long-term archive of the data set will 
be maintained on the NCAR Mass Storage System. 

     I want to point out that both raw and processed data are backed
up on the NCAR Mass Storage System which has proven to be a reliable
archive.  

     Several items enclosed with this letter should be considered
part of the data package and are important to your analysis of the
flight data.  A copy of all of this information also will be
available in electronic format through the UCAR OFPS ACE-1 archive. 
They are:

 1.  Output Tape Log:  A complete list of information on the
     processed data files

 2.  Research Flight Reports:  Flight OPS summaries including
     general information on arrival & departure times and data
     recording intervals 

 3.  Data Quality Report:  Review of the general limitations
     of the data set along with flight-by-flight documentation
     of questionable data

 4.  Summary of IRS performance, including final terminal
     position and ground speed errors for each flight

 5.  Bulletin No. 9:  RAF documentation that describes the
     characteristics of each measurement and the algorithms
     used in data processing.  This bulletin also lists the
     variable names used on the output and interprets each
     measurement.

 6.  Bulletin No. 23:  RAF documentation that describes air
     motion measurement techniques on the NCAR research
     aircraft.  This bulletin also discusses the in-flight
     calibration maneuvers, their purpose and interpretation.

 7.  Bulletin No. 24: RAF documentation that describes the
     operational characteristics and limitations of the cloud
     microphysical and particle measurement systems used on the
     NCAR research aircraft.

 8.  Aircraft Research Instrumentation Configuration: 
     Sensors, signal conditioners, filters and sample rates.

 9.  Summary of Project Calibrations.  Note that the
     calibration coefficients and primary sensors used for all
     derived parameters are identified in the header of each
     netCDF data file.        

10.  List of parameters provided by the final data processing.

11.  Output Tape Format Description
      a) netCDF
      b) LRT and HRT processed data. 

12.  Video Film Logs - Documentation on VCR records made
     during the research flights

     It is essential that we learn from users, such as yourself,
their evaluation of the support we have provided, beginning with
the planning phase and continuing through the field phase on to the
delivery of and finally the analysis by the user of the data.  This
feedback activity is carried out through the office of Dr. David  
Carlson, the Director of the Atmospheric Technology Division.  It 
begins with a phone call from David--by now he may already have
contacted you, and continues with a letter from him several months
after you have received the data.  We believe this procedure
provides the user with a convenient path for presenting us with
constructive criticism.       

     As you proceed with the analysis of the data, you may have
questions, encounter problems, or uncover discrepancies or other
aspects of the data that may be of interest to the RAF and to other
users.  Specific discrepancies or errors in the data should be
brought to the attention of Allen Schanot, the Project Manager.

     I hope that the support of your research by the Aviation
Facility has been satisfactory.  It has been our pleasure to serve
you.  If I can be of further help, please do not hesitate to call.

                                   Sincerely,


                                   Paul Herzegh, Manager
                                   Research Aviation Facility

Enclosures

cc:  D. Carlson
