This site contains the final documentation for the airborne measurements obtained from the NSF/NCAR Research Aviation Facility (RAF) EC-130Q Hercules aircraft during the Dynamics and Chemistry of Marine Stratocumulus-II (DYCOMS-II) project.  This field campaign took place from 5-30 July 2001.

Orders for the low rate (LRT; 1 sample per second) and high rate (HRT) production data sets may be directed to the RAF Data Manager, Ron Ruth, rafdmg@ucar.edu.  The data files are also available using the NCAR/Research Data Program (RDP) Mass Store File Selection GUI.  Users should be aware that the high rate production data files contain only a subset of all of the variables recorded on the C-130 data system during DYCOMS-II.  Click here to see an example of a HRT production netCDF file header, which lists all of the variables contained in each HRT data file.

Software to be used in viewing the low and high rate data is available from the RAF.  Please consult the RAF Software Product Guide for more information on available RAF data perusal programs.

Both the raw and production output data from the C-130 data system have been archived to the NCAR/SCD Mass Store System (MSS).  The latter has proven to be an extremely reliable archival platform.  However, we strongly urge data recipients to make their own archival copies in order to protect against damage or loss.

Data products recorded on individual investigator data systems on the C-130 - as well as satellite, surface, upper air, and model output data products - have been archived to the UCAR/JOSS DYCOMS-II Data Management Web site.  Users wishing to obtain any of the above-listed data products are referred to this Web site.

As you proceed with the analysis of C-130 data system products, you may have questions, encounter problems, or uncover discrepancies or other aspects of the data set that may be of interest to the RAF and other users.  We ask that you bring these issues to the attention of the DYCOMS-II project managers:

	Krista Laursen, krista@ucar.edu, (303)497-1031
	Dick Friesen, rbf@ucar.edu, (303)497-1047

	Mail address:

		National Center for Atmospheric Research
		ATD/Research Aviation Facility
		P.O. Box 3000
		Boulder, CO 80307-3000
		U.S.A.

We also solicit your more general comments on the quality, usefulness, and/or new applications of the data.

We hope the support of this project provided by the Research Aviation Facility has been satisfactory.  It has been our pleasure to serve you.  If we can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to call on us.

Sincerely,

Krista Laursen
Project Manager/Associate Scientist

Dick Friesen
Project Manager/Project and Data Support Group Chief

Jeffrey L. Stith, Ph.D.
Manager, Research Aviation Facility
