Project #2001-181 DYCOMS-II
Dynamics and Chemistry of Marine Stratocumulus-II

Bjorn Stevens
NSF/NCAR EC-130Q Hercules (N130AR)

Data Quality Report

Prepared by:  Krista Laursen (NCAR/RAF)

11 October 2001


This document is intended to provide an overview of problems, limitations, and features to be 
found in the DYCOMS-II C-130 data set.  Two sections are included in this summary.  The first 
contains an outline of general problems and limitations common to all of the project flights.  The 
second section details specific flight-by-flight problems and comments.

Every attempt has been made to be as thorough and complete as possible during the quality 
checking of the DYCOMS-II C-130 data set.  However, given the significant number of 
variables in the processed data files, it is possible that some problems within the data set were 
not detected.  Users of these data are encouraged to notify the RAF should they discover 
additional problems and/or limitations within the data set.  Information regarding such problems 
should be brought to the attention of Krista Laursen (303-497-1031 or krista@ucar.edu) or Dick 
Friesen (303-497-1047 or rbf@ucar.edu), the DYCOMS-II C-130 project managers, or Ron Ruth 
(303-497-1084 or ruth@ucar.edu), the RAF data manager.


Section I:  General Data Set Quality and Limitations

1.	In general, measurements of ambient temperature made on the C-130 using the two 
radome-mounted sensors (ATRL, Ambient Temperature Radome Left; ATRR, Ambient 
Temperature Radome Right) were in agreement with each other within a range of approximately 
0.1 oC throughout the DYCOMS-II project.  Ambient temperature data obtained from the heated, 
wing-mounted sensor (ATWH, Ambient Temperature, Deiced Wing) were, however, typically 
offset from the ATRL and ATRR data by a few tenths of a oC during each of the project flights.  
Based on a careful review of the ATRL, ATRR, and ATWH data and a comparison with 
dewpoint temperature data during in-cloud segments, it was determined that ATRL yielded the 
most reliable ambient temperature data.  Consequently, the reference ambient temperature 
variable, ATX, was set to ATRL for each of the DYCOMS-II test, ferry, and research flights.  
Users are advised to use ATX in any calculations requiring ambient temperature data.

2.	Measurements of dewpoint temperature obtained from the two General Eastern 
hygrometers on the C-130 (DPBC, Dewpoint Temperature, Bottom Corrected; DPTC, Dewpoint 
Temperature, Top Corrected) were typically in good agreement (within 0.1-0.2 oC of each other) 
for each of the DYCOMS-II flights.  Based on a comparison of DPBC and DPTC data with 
ambient temperature data during in-cloud passes, the decision was made to set the reference 
corrected dewpoint temperature variable, DPXC, to DPBC for the majority of the DYCOMS-II 
flights.  The exception to this was RF03, in which case DPXC was set to DPTC due to problems 
encountered with the DPBC sensor during the first quarter of the flight.

It should be noted that, during those periods in which the aircraft was flying at higher altitudes in 
regions of colder temperatures, DPBC (and hence DPXC for all flights but RF03) frequently 
displayed significant oscillatory behavior.  However, since most of the critical DYCOMS-II data 
were collected at lower altitudes at which such oscillatory behavior did not occur, it is the 
opinion of the RAF that DPBC still yields the most consistently reliable dewpoint temperature 
data.  Consequently, users are advised to use DPXC in any calculations requiring dewpoint 
temperature data.  In those cases for which dewpoint temperature data are needed for higher 
altitude/cold temperature flight path segments, it is perhaps advisable for investigators to use 
DPTC data.

3.	Mixing ratio data were obtained from three sensors during DYCOMS-II:  the General 
Eastern hygrometer (MR), the “stubby” Lyman-Alpha (MRLA), and the cross-flow Lyman-
Alpha (MRLA1).  In general, agreement between the three mixing ratio variables was quite good 
throughout the project.  However, users of the data set will notice that the variable MR 
periodically displays “overshooting” and offsetting from MRLA and MRLA1.  This behavior is 
attributable to periodic (and short-term) saturation of the General Eastern hygrometer.  Figure 1 
shows an example of this behavior in MR during RF07.

In similar fashion to the MR data, “overshooting” and offsetting also appear at times in the 
MRLA data.  As with the General Eastern sensor, this problem is attributable to temporary 
saturation of the “stubby” Lyman-Alpha sensor.  Figure 1 also shows an example of the effect of 
temporary saturation on collected MRLA data.  The cross-flow Lyman-Alpha sensor performed 
extremely well throughout the DYCOMS-II project.  Consequently, the RAF recommends that 
MRLA1 data be used in any analyses requiring mixing ratio data.  Similarly, it is advisable to 
use RHOLA1 (cross-flow Lyman-Alpha absolute humidity) rather than RHODT (General 
Eastern hygrometer-derived absolute humidity) or RHOLA (“stubby” Lyman-Alpha absolute 
humidity) in calculations requiring absolute humidity data.

4.	Due to the marine environment in which the majority of the DYCOMS-II flights were 
conducted, the decision was made to use the humidity-corrected true airspeed variable (TASHC) 
in the processing of the C-130 data.  In dry atmospheric conditions (e.g., for the test flights in 
Colorado and for the ferry flights to and from NAS North Island), TASHC differs from the 
reference true airspeed (TASX, set to the radome true airspeed, TASR) by a few hundredths of a 
meter per second (m/s).  However, during the test and research flights conducted from North 
Island, TASHC differed from TASX in some cases by a few tenths of a m/s.  In view of the latter 
differences, it was deemed important to use TASHC in the processing of all of the DYCOMS-II 
flight data.  Users are, therefore, advised to use TASHC in all calculations requiring true airspeed 
data, especially for those studies being conducted on those flights flown from North Island.

5.	Aircraft altitude data are available from the following three sources recorded on the 
aircraft data system during the project:  GPS altitude (GALT), pressure altitude (PALT, in 
meters, and PALTF, in feet), and a RAF-derived reference altitude (ALTX).  Outputs of all three 
variables have been included in each of the processed flight data files.  According to Trimble 
(the manufacturer of the TANS III GPS unit deployed on the C-130), an accuracy of 24 meters 
(RMS) in the vertical (altitude) data from the GPS can be expected.  The Inertial Reference 
System (IRS) altitude data (ALT) are generally considered by the RAF to be of questionable 
quality.  Consequently, the decision was made to remove the variable ALT from each of the final 
flight netCDF files.

Geometric height (HGM232) data are also available for each of the DYCOMS-II flights.  It 
should be noted, however, that interrupt code added to the RAF data acquisition software for the 
purposes of recording the Drexel APIMS digital data introduced spiking into the HGM232 and 
PSFDC (static pressure) data recorded on the C-130 data system.  A multi-point despiking 
algorithm was used during the final processing of the DYCOMS-II data, and this removed the 
majority of the spikes from the HGM232 and PSFDC data.  Nevertheless, users of the data set 
will note that some spiking remains in the HGM232 data.  (Most notably at the beginning and 
end of flights and for a brief number of seconds during some research flights.)  It is the opinion 
of the RAF, however, that the overall quality of the HGM232 data is very good.

In general, it is recommended that investigators use either ALTX or GALT for measurements of 
altitude and HGM232 for geometric height data when performing analyses using the DYCOMS-
II data set.

6.	As was mentioned in 5 above, interrupt code added to the RAF data acquisition software 
introduced spiking into the PSFDC (Corrected Static Pressure, Fuselage Digital Sensor) data 
collected during the project.  The multi-point de-spiking algorithm used during the final 
processing of the data set successfully removed the majority of these spikes from the PSFDC 
data.  Nevertheless, because some small amount of spiking remained, the decision was made to 
set the reference corrected static pressure variable, PSXC, to PSFC (Corrected Static Pressure, 
Fuselage Sensor) for all of the DYCOMS-II flights.  Consequently, PSFC was used in the 
processing of all collected C-130 data requiring corrected static pressure data as input.  Users 
requiring corrected static pressure data for calculations are advised to use the variable PSXC.

7.	Aircraft position data obtained from the Trimble GPS on the C-130 (the latitude and 
longitude variables GLAT and GLON, respectively) are considered to be of higher accuracy than 
position data obtained from the aircraft’s IRS (the latitude and longitude variables LAT and 
LON, respectively).  An accuracy of 16 meters (RMS) in the horizontal can be expected in the 
GPS position data.  Furthermore, the GPS system performed very well throughout the 
DYCOMS-II deployment.  Therefore, users are advised to use GLAT and GLON in all analyses 
requiring aircraft position data.

8.	Steep banked turns (such as those executed during spiral ascents and descents with roll 
angles greater than 25 degrees) compromise the quality of the C-130 wind data (RAF variables 
UI, VI, WI, etc.) due to the adverse effects of the prolonged turns on the aircraft’s IRS unit.  
Users are, therefore, advised to use the processed wind data corresponding to such turn segments 
with caution.

9.	It is recommended that investigators use the GPS-corrected wind variables (UIC, VIC, 
WIC, WDC, and WSC) in any studies and/or calculations requiring wind speed and/or direction 
measurements.  These variables are, generally, considered to provide the most reliable wind 
vector measurements.

10.	During a review of the downwelling and upwelling shortwave and ultraviolet radiometer 
data collected during the project (RAF variables SWT, SWB, UVT, and UVB, respectively), 
offsets in each of the four variables were found.  An analysis of the SWT and SWB data 
collected during the nighttime flight legs was carried out to quantify the offset present in each of 
the two variables.  These offsets were then removed (i.e., subtracted out) during final processing 
of the SWT and SWB data.  Re-processing of the UVT and UVB data with the post-DYCOMS-
II calibration coefficients for these two variables yielded downwelling and upwelling ultraviolet 
radiometer data with no visible offsets.  Consequently, the post-project calibration coefficients 
for UVT and UVB were used in the final processing of these two variables.

11.	Modelling studies were conducted for some of the DYCOMS-II flights to derive values 
needed to correct the downwelling shortwave radiometer data (SWT) for the effects of aircraft 
attitude.  A simple radiative transfer model was used to determine shortwave direct and diffuse 
radiation fractions, both of which are used in the correction algorithm used in routine processing 
by the RAF.  Direct and diffuse fractions were derived for two different cases:  for the nocturnal 
flights from North Island carried out in the marine environment, and for the daytime flights from 
North Island carried out in the marine environment.  Direct and diffuse fractions for the flights 
conducted at higher latitudes and less humid conditions (e.g., the test flights in Colorado) were 
taken from modelling studies conducted for a previous C-130 project supported by the RAF.  
The appropriate fraction values were then applied during the processing of the DYCOMS-II C-
130 data in order to generate attitude-corrected downwelling shortwave radiometer data (RAF 
variable SWTC) for each flight.

12.	In general, good agreement (i.e., overlap) is found between the concentration spectra for 
the SPP-200, SPP-300, SPP-100, 260X, and 2D-C probes flown on the C-130 for the project.  
Specific problems encountered with the SPP-100 probes deployed on the aircraft during 
DYCOMS-II are outlined in item 13 below.  Also, additional problems experienced with the 
various PMS probes are detailed as needed in the section “Flight-by-Flight Summary and 
Discussion” below.

Users should be aware that periodic discrepancies between SPP-200 and SPP-300 concentrations 
appear in the concentration spectra in the droplet/particle diameter range of 1-3 µm.  In these 
instances, the recorded SPP-200 concentrations are significantly higher than the recorded SPP-
300 concentrations.  For droplet/particle diameter sizes of less than 1 µm, agreement between the 
recorded SPP-200 and SPP-300 concentrations is, typically, quite good.

13.	 Some problems were encountered during DYCOMS-II with the RAF SPP-100s deployed 
on the C-130.  For TF01-03, FF01, and RF01-02, SPP-100 serial number (S/N) 109 was flown 
on the aircraft.  It was determined after careful reviews of the S/N 109 probe data that this probe 
was sizing droplets too large by approximately two bins.  Users of the SPP-100 data collected 
during the first six flights of the project are, therefore, advised that these data (specifically, the 
SPP-100 size spectra, derived concentrations, etc.) are slightly questionable.

For the remaining project flights (RF03-10 and FF02), RAF SPP-100 S/N 122 was deployed on 
the C-130.  While this probe sized droplets correctly (with the exception of RF05; see flight-by-
flight comments for RF05 below), it nevertheless displayed a significant problem with “falling 
asleep” (i.e., not responding) for various time periods during several research flights.  (See the 
section “Flight-by-Flight Summary and Discussion” below for detailed information regarding 
when this problem occurred.)  In some cases, it was possible to “wake up” the S/N 122 probe by 
cycling left wing pod power to the probe.  However, these sequences of the probe falling asleep 
and then being awakened by power cycling introduced periods of missing data followed by large 
spikes in the collected S/N 122 SPP-100 data.  These episodes of missing data and spikes appear 
in all of the recorded SPP-100 variables, including the concentration, derived liquid water 
content, DBZ, and other SPP-100 data values.  Unfortunately, it was not possible to remove this 
spiking from the S/N 122 SPP-100 data using existing RAF de-spiking algorithms.  
Consequently, investigators using the SPP-100 data for RF03-10 and FF02 are advised to be 
vigilant and to scrutinize the SPP-100 data for the presence of such spikes before proceeding 
with analyses of the data.  To aid users in identifying episodes of spiking in the processed SPP-
100 data, Figure 2 shows an example of such spikes in S/N 122 SPP-100 data recorded during 
RF03.

14.	Related to the problems encountered with the S/N 122 SPP-100 probe and the need to 
cycle power to the left wing pod in order to revive the probe, users are advised that these 
episodes of power cycling also led to periods of missing/bad data in other left wing pod 
instrument variables.  Specifically, such periods of missing/bad data appear in the Gerber PVM-
100 variables (XGLWC, XGSFC, and XGRFF) recorded on the C-130 data system.  Users 
should consult Section II of this document (“Flight-by-Flight Summary and Discussion”) for 
information regarding those flights during which power was cycled to the left wing pod and, 
consequently, missing/bad data and spiking appear in left wing pod instrument variables 
recorded on the C-130 data system.

The episodes of left wing pod power cycling may have also introduced periods of missing/bad 
data in the collected data stream from the French Fast FSSP, for which data were recorded on a 
separate, stand-alone data system.  Users of the Fast FSSP data are, therefore, advised to 
scrutinize the Fast FSSP data for missing/bad data periods prior to using these data in analyses.

15.	It was decided by the RAF to remove three of the TDL hygrometer variables (MRLHS, 
Mixing Ratio, TDL Hygrometer Strong Line; MRLHW, Mixing Ratio, TDL Hygrometer Weak 
Line; ATLH, Total Temperature, TDL Hygrometer) recorded on the C-130 data system from the 
final netCDF files generated for the project.  This decision was made due to the fact that the 
quality of the data contained in each of the three variables appeared to be inconsistent and 
questionable.  The output of a fourth TDL variable recorded on the C-130 data system (PSLH, 
Raw Static Pressure, TDL Hygrometer) was, instead, left in each of the final project data files 
after it was determined that the PSLH values tracked other measurements of static pressure made 
on the aircraft quite well during each of the project flights.

It should be noted that the exclusion of the above three TDL variables from the final netCDF 
data files does not mean that TDL data will not be available for the project.  During DYCOMS-
II, TDL hygrometer data were also recorded on a separate, stand-alone data system for the 
instrument.  Teresa Campos of the RAF will be processing the TDL data recorded on this 
separate data system and will oversee distribution of these data to the DYCOMS-II investigators 
and the scientific community.  Questions regarding the quality and availability of the TDL data 
collected during the project should be directed to Teresa Campos (campos@ucar.edu).

16.	The Ophir III radiometric thermometer deployed on the C-130 for the project did not 
perform satisfactorily during any of the project flights.  Consequently, the output of all Ophir III 
variables recorded on the C-130 data system was removed from the final, processed data files, 
and no Ophir III data are available for this project.

Similarly, the French refractometer mounted on the C-130 for DYCOMS-II did not perform 
correctly during any of the project flights.  As a result, the output of all of the refractometer 
variables recorded on the C-130 data system (CABRT, CAVRT, REFRACI, REFRACP, and 
REFRACT) was turned off during the production of the final project data files, and no 
refractometer data are available for this project.

17.	Two Heimann radiometers were deployed on the C-130 for DYCOMS-II for the purpose 
of obtaining surface temperature measurements during the project.  The two corresponding 
variables recorded on the C-130 data system are RSTB (Radiometric Surface Temperature, 
Sensor 1) and RSTB1 (Radiometric Surface Temperature, Sensor 2).  During post-project review 
of the collected data, it was determined by the RAF that, while the two variables track each other 
well during each flight, RSTB1 yields data of slightly better quality.  The latter decision was 
reached after RSTB and RSTB1 data were compared with ambient and dewpoint temperature 
data collected during in-cloud passes; RSTB1 consistently displayed temperature values that 
were in better agreement with the in-cloud ambient and dewpoint temperature data.  Also, less 
noise is present in the recorded RSTB1 data than appears in the recorded RSTB data.  
Consequently, users interested in using surface temperature data in their analyses are advised to 
use the variable RSTB1 in their studies.

18.	Hermann Gerber has advised the RAF that, because of the dependence on XGLWC in the 
equations used to calculate the PVM-100 quantity XGRFF (Gerber PVM-100 Effective Droplet 
Radius) and the CIN quantity CING (Gerber CIN Asymmetry Parameter), both XGRFF and 
CING have no value when XGLWC < 0.05 g/m3.  Thus, users are advised that, during 
processing of the DYCOMS-II data set, both XGRFF and CING were assigned no value 
whenever the condition of XGWLC < 0.05 g/m3 was met.

Hermann has also advised the RAF that, during time segments after sunrise, the Gerber CIN 
channels CINB and CINCB (Gerber CIN Backscatter and Gerber CIN Cosine of Scattering 
Angle Times Backscatter, respectively) display substantial offsets.  He believes this problem to 
be attributable to maladjusted synchronous detector circuits which permit some DC light level to 
pass through.  Offsets in CINB and CINCB do not appear in data collected during nighttime 
flight segments.  Prior to final processing, Hermann provided the RAF with offsets for each of 
the raw CIN and PVM-100 signals recorded on the C-130 data system, and these offsets were 
removed during processing.  Nevertheless, users of the CIN data are advised to be aware of the 
possible presence of small, residual offsets in the CINB and CINCB data, per Hermann’s 
communication with the RAF as outlined above.

19.	Information on the calibration history of the PVM-100 deployed on the C-130 for 
DYCOMS-II is available in an Adobe Acrobat (PDF) document (called “pvmcut.pdf”) prepared 
by Hermann Gerber.  Users can click here to download and view a copy of this PDF document. 

20.	The data outputs from several user-supported instruments were recorded on the C-130 
data system during the project.  In almost all cases, the recorded output variables are included in 
the final processed netCDF files for the project.  While the RAF has processed and distributed 
these user variables in the final data files, it should be noted by all investigators that the RAF is 
not responsible for the quality-checking and data quality analysis for any of the user variables 
recorded on the C-130 data system.  Investigators with any questions regarding the quality, 
correct usage, etc. of any of the user-supplied variables recorded on the C-130 must contact the 
responsible investigator directly.

In order to aid investigators with determining who should be contacted with questions regarding 
user-supported instrumentation data products, the following table outlines the user-supported 
instrumentation flown on the C-130 for which data were recorded on the C-130 data system and 
lists the appropriate contact person and contact information.

Instrument
Contact Person
Contact Information
Drexel APIMS
Alan Bandy or Don Thornton
bandyar@drexel.edu; 
dct@drexel.edu
LAS-AIR Analog Signals
Cindy Twohy
twohy@oce.orst.edu
Streaker Samplers (Analog 
Signals)
Jim Anderson
janderson@asu.edu
Princeton Organic Filter 
Concentrator and Streaker 
Sampler Analog Signals
Lynn Russell
lrussell@princeton.edu
Wyoming CCN/CN Equipment
Jeff Snider
jsnider@uwyo.edu
Warsaw Univ. UFT-F
Kris Haman or Szymon 
Malinowski
Krzysztof.Haman@fuw.edu.pl; 
Szymon-P.Malinowski@fuw.edu.pl
Gerber PVM-100* and CIN
Hermann Gerber
hgerber6@home.com
NCAR/RAF RDMA
Dave Rogers
dcrogers@ucar.edu
LTI**
Dave Rogers; Bernie LaFleur
dcrogers@ucar.edu; 
blafleur@du.edu
* The PVM-100 deployed on the C-130 for DYCOMS-II is a unit owned by the RAF but specially 
modified for ultra-high rate sampling by Hermann Gerber for the project.  Questions regarding the 
processing and data quality of the DYCOMS-II PVM-100 data can be addressed to either Hermann 
Gerber or the RAF.
** It is anticipated that the particle concentration enhancement factors derived from the LTI data 
processing will be archived to both the NCAR Mass Store System (MSS) and to the UCAR/JOSS 
DYCOMS-II data archive.


21.	Related to 20 above, it should be noted that the data streams from several user-supported 
instruments deployed on the C-130 were recorded on separate (stand-alone) data systems.  The 
data products recorded on these data systems will not be archived by the RAF but will, instead, 
be submitted for archival to the UCAR/JOSS DYCOMS-II Data Management Web Site.  
Users with questions regarding the availability, quality, and usage of data products recorded on 
stand-alone data systems must contact the investigator responsible for a specific instrument and 
data set directly.  Further, users wishing to obtain copies of data products recorded on 
independent data systems must visit the UCAR/JOSS site listed above for information and 
instructions on downloading available data products.

In order to aid users with determining who should be contacted with questions regarding 
independently recorded data sets, the following table outlines the user-supported instrumentation 
flown on the C-130 for which data were recorded on a stand-alone data system and lists the 
appropriate contact person and contact information.

Instrument
Contact Person(s)
Contact Information
Drexel APIMS*
Alan Bandy or Don Thornton
bandyar@drexel.edu; 
dct@drexel.edu
CVI and LAS-AIRs
Cindy Twohy
twohy@oce.orst.edu
Streaker Samplers
Jim Anderson
janderson@asu.edu
FTIR Filter Concentrator, XRF 
Filter Concentrator, and X-Ray 
Streaker Sampler
Lynn Russell
lrussell@princeton.edu
Wyoming Cloud Radar (WCR)
Gabor Vali
vali@uwyo.edu
Cloud Water Collector
Derek Straub
dstraub@ucar.edu
CNRM Fast FSSP-100
Jean-Louis Brenguier
jean-louis.brenguier@meteo.fr
NCAR/RTF SABL
Bruce Morley or Eric Loew
bruce@ucar.edu; 
ericloew@ucar.edu
NCAR/RTF GPS Dropsonde 
System
Terry Hock or Dean Lauritsen
hock@ucar.edu; lauritsn@ucar.edu
NCAR/RAF TDL Hygrometer
Teresa Campos
campos@ucar.edu
LTI**
Dave Rogers; Bernie LaFleur
dcrogers@ucar.edu; 
blafleur@du.edu
* Two digital signals from the APIMS (XDCNT and XDMASS) were recorded in the primary data 
(ADS) files on the C-130 data system during DYCOMS-II.  However, the raw APIMS data were also 
recorded to separate data files on the C-130 data system, and these raw data files have been provided to 
A. Bandy’s group at Drexel University for processing and analysis.  It is anticipated that A. Bandy’s 
group will provide final, separate APIMS data files to the UCAR/JOSS archive for DYCOMS-II.
** It is anticipated that the particle concentration enhancement factors derived from the LTI data 
processing will be archived to both the NCAR Mass Store System (MSS) and to the UCAR/JOSS 
DYCOMS-II data archive.

22.	RAF 2D-C probe data recorded during the project have been archived in separate data 
files to the NCAR Mass Store System (MSS).  Users can obtain copies of these 2D-C data files 
using the NCAR/RAF DYCOMS-II Data Request Site.  Similarly, the RAF RDMA data 
recorded on the C-130 during DYCOMS-II were processed into separate ASCII files for each 
project flight.  These files have, in turn, been archived to the NCAR MSS and can be accessed by 
users using the above-listed RAF Data Request Site link.

Multichannel cloud radiometer (MCR) data obtained during the project will require separate 
calibration, processing, and data quality review procedures prior to release.  It is anticipated that 
the final processed MCR data files will be archived to both the NCAR MSS and to the 
UCAR/JOSS DYCOMS-II Data Management Web site.  Questions regarding the availability and 
quality of the MCR data collected during DYCOMS-II should be addressed to Mark Tschudi of 
the RAF (tschudi@ucar.edu).


Section II:  Flight-by-Flight Summary and Discussion

All flight dates listed are GMT flight dates.

TF01 (6/26/01)
? “Stubby” Lyman-Alpha sensor not working this flight; no VLA, MRLA, and RHOLA 
data in netCDF output file.
? Radar altimeter not working this flight; no HGM232, HGM232S, and PSURF 
(Calculated Surface Pressure; derived using HGM232) data in netCDF output file.
? Routinely high counts in lower channels (bins 1-4) of SPP-300; SPP-300 data 
questionable this flight.
? Sample rate for PVM-100 analog channels (XGLWC and XGSFC) set to 25 samples per 
second (sps) this flight.


TF02 (6/29/01)
? PLWC King probe sensor not working this flight; no PLWC and PLWCC data in netCDF 
output file.


FF01 (7/5/01)
? Bad true airspeed data input into 2D-C probe this flight; 2D-C data unusable and not 
included in netCDF output file.  Also, no separate 2D data file available for this flight.


TF03 (7/701)
? Bad true airspeed data input into 2D-C probe this flight; 2D-C data unusable and not 
included in netCDF output file.  Also, no separate 2D data file available for this flight.


RF01 (7/10/01)
? Bad true airspeed data input into 2D-C probe this flight; 2D-C data unusable and not 
included in netCDF output file.  Also, no separate 2D data file available for this flight.
? PLWC1 King probe sensor not working this flight; no PLWC1 and PLWCC1 data in 
netCDF output file.
? XGSFC data from PVM-100 bad this flight; no XGSFC and XGRFF (Gerber PVM-100 
Effective Radius; derived using XGSFC data) in netCDF output file.
? 260X probe and SPP-100 not working properly this flight (significant periods of no data 
for each probe); data for both probes questionable this flight.
? LTI worked well throughout mission; however, not possible to maintain isokinetic flow 
at lower altitudes.


RF02 (7/11/01)
? No SPP-100 data (probe unresponsive) until 09:18:00 GMT and from 14:31:00 GMT to 
end of flight.
? Sample rate for PVM-100 analog channels (XGLWC and XGSFC) set to 250 sps this 
flight.


RF03 (7/13/01)
? DPB and DPBC data bad from 06:18:23-08:32:03 GMT.
? XGLWC (Gerber PVM-100 Liquid Water Content) data bad from 11:00:00-11:54:00 
GMT; consequently, XGRFF and CING (Gerber CIN Asymmetry Parameter) data bad 
from 11:00:00-11:54:00 GMT, also.
? Several instances of SPP-100 “falling asleep” during flight and needing to have left wing 
pod power cycled in order to revive; consequently, several periods of missing data and 
spiking are apparent in SPP-100 variables.  Corresponding periods of missing/bad data 
are also apparent in other left wing pod instrument variables (i.e., Gerber PVM-100 
variables XGLWC, XGSFC, XGRFF) due to cycling of power to pod.
? Occasional dropouts and spiking in SPP-300 data until 08:49:10 GMT.


RF04 (7/17/01)
? XGLWC data bad from 11:48:00-15:31:30 GMT; consequently, XGRFF and CING data 
bad from 11:48:00-15:31:30 GMT, also.
? Several instances of SPP-100 “falling asleep” during flight and needing to have left wing 
pod power cycled in order to revive; consequently, several periods of missing data and 
spiking are apparent in SPP-100 variables.  Corresponding periods of missing/bad data 
are also apparent in other left wing pod instrument variables (i.e., Gerber PVM-100 
variables XGLWC, XGSFC, XGRFF) due to cycling of power to pod.
? Right wing tip PMS probe circuit breaker for 260X and 2D-C probes not set at beginning 
of flight, reset at 08:33:22 GMT; no 260X and 2D-C data until 08:33:22 GMT.


RF05 (7/18/01)
? SPP-100 operated in wrong range for duration of flight due to a chip problem on probe 
card; SPP-100 data unusable this flight, so not included in netCDF output file.  No SPP-
100 data available for this flight.


RF06 (7/20/01)
? Several instances of SPP-100 “falling asleep” during flight and needing to have left wing 
pod power cycled in order to revive; consequently, several periods of missing data and 
spiking are apparent in SPP-100 variables.  Corresponding periods of missing/bad data 
are also apparent in other left wing pod instrument variables (i.e., Gerber PVM-100 
variables XGLWC, XGSFC, XGRFF) due to cycling of power to pod.  Decision made at 
08:15:37 GMT to cease cycling power to left wing pod in order to revive SPP-100.  Thus, 
no SPP-100 data from 08:15:37 GMT to end of flight.
? Several periods of bad DPT and DPTC data during flight, presumably due to saturation of 
DPT sensor; DPT and DPTC data bad from 07:25:38-07:44:47, 08:16:01-09:36:25, 
10:05:08-10:09:00, 10:40:52-10:44:32, 10:53:15-10:57:32, and 11:21:21-11:45:49 GMT.


RF07 (7/24/01)
? No comments.


RF08 (7/25/01)
? Two instances of spiking in SPP-100 data, at 23:20:38 and 05:07:58 GMT; however, 
majority of SPP-100 data good this flight.
? GALT and ALTX data bad from 21:19:57-21:22:48 GMT; GALT data bad from 
00:29:49-00:30:15 GMT. 


RF09 (7/27/01)
? Problems with significant drift in C-130 IRS data outputs starting at approximately 00:16 
GMT; LAT, LON, UI, UX, VEW, VI, VNS, VY, WD, WI, and WS data bad past this 
time, and not included in netCDF output file.
? One instance of spiking in SPP-100 data at 19:27:00 GMT; however, majority of SPP-
100 data good this flight.


RF10 (7/28/01)
? 260X and 2D-C probes not responding at beginning of flight; right wing tip PMS probe 
circuit breaker reset at approximately 20:26 GMT, and good 260X and 2D-C probe data 
obtained for remainder of flight after this time.


FF02 (7/30/01)
? No comments.



11

