DYCOMS-II: Data
>
     DYCOMS-II has been formulated as a collaborative experiment
     designed to collect a high-quality data set capable of
     meeting the scientific goals of its science team, and also
     of providing for the needs of a broader community. Toward
     this end DYCOMS PIs have adopted the following data policy.
>
     Initial Access
          Access to the data archive, which shall include all
          data collected using RAF instrumentation and or
          data-loggers, will be limited to the science team
          (i.e., experiment participants who agree to the DYCOMS
          II data policy) and its designates during the first
          year after the data is made ready for release. Note
          that this is somewhat later than one year after the
          experiment. This is to insure that the science team is
          given the possibility of meeting its contractual
          obligations (scientific goals).
     Guidelines for Data Publication During First Year
          Publications prepared during this first year of
          restricted access will be subject to internal review by
          the members of the science team. This is to prevent
          accidental mischaracterizations or misuse of the
          data/and or experiment. It also provides a means for
          resolving priority claims before papers are submitted.
     Archiving Data
          Unless specific arrangements are made with the science
          team before hand, or data quality issues so dictate,
          data collected by investigators flying their own
          instruments will be incorporated into the archive, and
          made available to the science team during the
          prerelease period.
     Collaboration Guidelines
          Publications that are written during the year of
          restricted access and which incorporate data from
          individually supported instruments shall be subject to
          approval of the PI whose instrument's data is being
          analyzed. Ideally such papers will develop in a
          collaborative fashion.
     Public Access
          Every effort will be made to make sure that the
          publically released data archive is widely advertised
          to the community and readily available to all
          interested parties. As time and resources permit,
          efforts will be made to blend this archive with
          historical archives, such as DYCOMS-I, FIRE and ASTEX.
