
   		   ACE - ASIA
	NCAR C-130 - Project #1-131
	Data Quality Report
(Revised 9/20/01)


This summary has been written to outline basic 
instrumentation problems affecting the quality of the data set 
and is not intended to point out every bit of questionable data. 
 It is hoped that this information will facilitate use of the 
data as the research concentrates on specific flights and times.

The following report covers only the RAF supplied 
instrumentation and is organized into two sections.  The first 
section lists recurring problems, general limitations, and 
systematic biases in the standard RAF measurements.  The second 
section lists isolated problems occurring on a flight-by-flight 
basis.  A discussion of the performance of the SABL lidar, LTI 
inlet system, and RAF chemistry sensors will be provided 
separately, as will the respective data sets.

Section I: General Discussion

      1. RAF staff has reviewed the data set for 
instrumentation problems.  When an instrument has been found 
to be malfunctioning, specific time intervals are noted.  In 
those instances the bad data intervals have been filled in 
the netCDF data files with the missing data code of -32767. 
In some instances a system will be out for an entire flight.

 	2. The wind data for this project were derived from 
measurements taken with the radome wind gust package.  As is 
normally the case with all wind gust systems, the ambient 
wind calculations can be adversely affected by either sharp 
changes in the aircraft's flight attitude or excessive drift 
in the onboard inertial reference system (IRS).  Turns, or 
more importantly, climbing turns are particularly disruptive 
to this type of measurement technique.  Wind data reported 
for these conditions should be used with caution.

Special sets of in-flight calibration maneuvers were 
conducted on flights TF03 and RF15 to aid in the performance 
analysis of the wind gust measurements.  The calibration 
data identified a systematic bias in the pitch and sideslip 
parameters. These offsets have been removed from the final 
data set.  The time intervals for each set of maneuvers have 
been documented in both the flight-by-flight data quality 
review and on the individual Research Flight Forms prepared 
for each flight. Late in the program excessive drift in the 
position output of the Inertial Reference System (IRS) 
resulted in some errors in the basic wind data.  Such cases 
are noted in the flight-by-flight section of this summary.
Drifts in the IRS accelerometers are removed using an 
algorithm that employs a complementary high-pass/low-pass 
filter that removes the longer term drift with the accurate 
GPS reference and preserves the shorter term fluctuations 
measured by the IRS. 

Both the GPS corrected and basic uncorrected values are 
included in the final data set.  RAF strongly recommends 
that the GPS corrected inertial winds be used for all 
research efforts (WSC,WDC,UXC,VYC,WIC,UIC,VIC).  

3. A Trimble Global Positioning System (GPS) was used 
as a more accurate position reference during the program.  
The system performed extremely well and the GPS position 
values should be used for all research efforts (GLAT, GLON). 
There may be occasional spikes in these due to satellite 
geometry and aircraft maneuvering. The algorithm referred to 
in (3) above also blends the GPS and IRS position to yield a 
best position (LATC, LONC) that generally removes the GPS 
spikes. 

4. RAF flies redundant sensors to assure data quality. 
Performance characteristics differ from sensor to sensor 
with certain units being more susceptible to various thermal 
and dynamic effects than others.  Good comparisons were 
typically obtained between the two static pressures 
(PSFDC,PSFC), the three standard temperatures (ATRL, ATRR, 
ATWH), two dynamic pressures (QCRC, QCFC), three liquid 
water sensors (PLWCC, PLWCC1, XGLWC), and the two dew 
pointers (DPT,DPB).  Exceptions are noted in the flight-by-
flight summary.  The digital static pressure (PSFDC) was 
selected as the reference pressure (PSXC) used in all of the 
derived parameters.  The two remote surface temperature 
sensors (RSTB, RSTB1) generally functioned well, but there 
were times when the two measurements differ significantly. 

5.  Temperature measurements were made using the 
standard heated (ATWH) and unheated (ATRR,ATRL) Rosemount 
temperature sensors.  All of the standard temperature 
sensors performed reasonably well, encountering the usual 
problems with sensor wetting during cloud passes. A 
comparison of the data sets yielded good correlation in 
instrument signatures and only small differences in absolute 
value (?0.2 ?C) through out the program. A comparison of pre 
and post program calibrations indicated that all units 
maintained stable and independent calibrations.  ATRR was 
selected as the reference value (ATX) used in calculating 
the derived parameters. 


 	6.  Humidity measurements were made using two collocated 
thermoelectric dew point sensors, two Lyman-alpha fast response 
hygrometers and an experimental TDL laser hygrometer.   Generally 
speaking, the humidity sensors performed well.  As is typically 
the case, the two dew point sensors (DPBC,DPTC) were set up 
differently to provide the best coverage under the widest range 
of ambient conditions.  DPTC was set up for fast response, but 
its dynamic range was more limited. DPBC had a slower response 
but had the capability of measuring greater dew point 
depressions. A comparison of the data sets yielded good 
correlation in instrument signatures during the largest portions 
of the flights when both instruments were functioning normally.  
However, some problems with water ingestion occurred which 
resulted in some sensor drift.  Each flight was evaluated on a 
case-by-case basis to see which dew point sensor was functioning 
the best on that particular flight. The selection of a reference 
humidity sensor (DPXC) for use in calculating all of the derived 
parameters was varied accordingly.

Lyman-alpha hygrometers are susceptible to in-flight drift 
in the instrument's bias voltage.  Due to this problem, RAF uses 
a special data processing technique to remove the bias drift by 
referencing the long term humidity values to one of the more 
stable thermoelectric dew point sensors.  Measurements from the 
two systems remained well correlated for clear air sampling but 
showed significant differences during cloud penetrations.  The 
two Lyman-alpha hygrometers used different housing types.  The 
stub unit (MRLA,RHOLA,DPLA,RHLA) tends to be slightly faster but 
is more susceptible to in-cloud wetting and thermal drift.  This 
unit failed during the project and had to be replaced.  The 
replacement system also failed late in the project.  The cross-
flow unit (MRLA1,RHOLA1,DPLA1,RHLA1) is therefore recommended as 
the reference sensor for basic analysis. For flux calculations, 
MRLA1 should be used.

A TDL (tunable diode laser) based hygrometer was flown on an 
experimental basis for this project.  The system was originally 
designed for measuring extremely low absolute humidities at 
stratospheric altitudes.  While the humidity values encountered 
during this deployment were in the normal operational range of 
the instrument, the bulk of the research flights were conducted 
at much lower altitudes.  A complex pressure calibration and 
special data processing are required to correct the basic data.  
At the time of this data release, the TDL data were not in a form 
that was suitable for inclusion.  We expect a subsequent release 
of a ‘corrected’ set of TDL data (MRLH) at a later date. The TDL 
data have been removed from the current release to avoid possible 
confusion.  

 7. A set of standard upward and downward facing radiometers 
were used to measure shortwave, ultraviolet, and infrared 
irradiance. It should be noted that all units are hard mounted 
and that none of the raw data have been corrected for changes in 
the aircraft's flight attitude. RAF has recently added a new set 
of irradiance parameters which have been corrected for aircraft 
attitude and relative sun angle.  A description of this 
correction process is provided in RAF Bulletin 9. 

8. Thermal temperature chamber experiments have indicated 
that the Heimann sensors used to remotely measure the surface 
temperature (RSTB, RSTB1) are sensitive to some thermal drift.   
In an attempt to deal with these problems the units were equipped 
with a temperature control heater system.  Generally speaking, 
the heater system stabilized the signals fairly well.  Some drift 
is still apparent in the data set.  RSTB1 seemed to be the more 
stable of the two units and exhibited better accuracy in the 
regular, single point, precision tests run prior to each flight. 
RSTB1 is therefore recommended as the reference system for this 
measurement. 
 
In addition to their thermal sensitivity, the accuracy of 
the remote sensing measurement is also dependent upon the total 
amount of water in the sensing path.  In such a moist, marine 
environment this sensitivity appears as an altitude dependence in 
the raw surface temperature. Using a compilation of vertical 
soundings from all of the research flights, RAF was able to 
empirically generate a mean moisture vertical profile that could 
be used to characterize the conditions encountered during the 
research flights.  To aid in the analysis of the data RAF has 
added a special calculation of sea surface temperature (XTSURF) 
which makes a rough attempt to account for this dependency. 


	9. The altitude of the aircraft was measured in several 
ways.  A pressure based altitude (PALT,PALTF) is derived from the 
static pressure using the hydrostatic equation and the U.S. 
Standard Atmosphere, which assumes a constant surface pressure of 
1013mb and a mean surface temperature of 288 ?C. 

A radar altimeter (HGM232) was onboard the aircraft for the 
project.  This unit worked well and, due to the fact that most of 
the research was conducted over a water surface, showed an 
excellent correlation with the calculated pressure altitude.  

	The GPS positioning system also provides an altitude readout 
(GALT).  The military has removed the electronic dithering of 
this signal that used to prevent its use by research aircraft.
This output now provides a fairly accurate MSL latitude based on 
a ellipsoid model of the Earth (WGS-84).  The signal recorded on 
the C-130 can still be interrupted during steep turns. 

	To aid the Users in choosing a common altitude to use in 
their analyses, RAF now calculates a ‘reference’ altitude (ALTX). 
The output is based directly upon GALT and uses basic smoothing 
techniques to fill gaps with Inertial altitude data when the GPS 
signal is interrupted.


10.  Two hot wire liquid water sensors were used on the C-
130 during the program.  The PMS King Probes (PLWCC, PLWCC1) 
worked well during the program. A comparison of the two units 
yielded a good correlation in instrument signatures and only 
small differences in absolute value through out the program. 
Special note should be made of the fact that both these 
instruments are calibrated for a specific range of aircraft 
speeds.  Small changes in the baseline are apparent with speed 
changes, as are small zero offsets.  Each cloud penetration will 
require a baseline adjustment with the relative change providing 
the sampled liquid water content.  Due to the nature of this 
sampling technique, it should be clear that water contained in 
ice particles will not be observed. This fact should be taken 
into account when comparing data from these sensors with the 
calculated liquid water content obtained from the optical 
particle probes.

A Gerber Model PVM-100 liquid water probe was included in 
the research instrumentation package.  The unit responded well to 
the presence of liquid water, but exhibited a large baseline 
offset that was strongly dependent upon changes in the aircraft 
true airspeed.  Calibration for this unit comes from the 
manufacturer.  The unit was returned for a full post-program 
evaluation and calibration.  During final data processing the RAF 
loose couple technique was used to remove some of the remaining 
baseline drift.


      11. The calculation of CN sized aerosol particle 
concentrations (CONCN) is dependent upon total particle counts 
(CNTS) and the measurement of sample flow (FCN,FCNC).  NOTE: the 
internal sample flow (FCN) has been corrected (FCNC) to ambient 
conditions, only, and not to STP for the calculation of particle 
concentration. If there are any questions about segments of the 
CONCN data, the flows should be examined to determine if the pump 
malfunctioned or if an obstruction in the inlet limited particle 
sampling. 

In the past, droplet shattering during cloud penetrations would 
sharply increase the number of counts and falsely increase 
indicated CN concentrations by several orders of magnitude. A new 
inlet system was used on this project, specifically designed to 
avoid this problem and provide good interstitial, in-cloud 
aerosol measurements.  


   12.  Five PMS particle probes (FSSP100, SSP300, SPP100, PCASP, 
260X) were used on the project.   Some specific details on each 
of the probes are summarized below:

PCASP - Through out the project the probe consistently
produced particle concentrations 5 to 6 times expected
values.  While the instrument was clearly responding to
changes in aerosol concentrations (as determined by 
comparisons with CONCN and CONC3) and the resulting 
size distributions seems reasonable, RAF could find no 
reason to account for the discrepancy in the total 
concentrations.  Therefore all of the data from this
probe are considered questionable and have been removed 
from this data release.  If further analysis results in 
a resolution to this problem, the data will be provided 
in a subsequent release.

FSSP100 - The FSSP100 and SPP100 probes use the same
optics but different electronics to measure both 
particles and small cloud droplets.  During the project 
the FSSP100 was primarily operated in the cloud droplet 
mode (3 to 50 ?m).  However, for the first 3 flights it 
          was operated on the same range as the SPP-100, 0.5 to  
          8.0 ?m. Cloud penetrations were limited but 
the system performed well.  Comparisons of particle 
sizing showed good agreement with the other particle 
probes in the ranges where the measurements overlapped. 
The droplet concentration data appear in the data set 
as CONCF_RPC.  Other related measurements can be 
identified by the _RPC suffix. Like all 1-D optical 
probes, however, the FSSP100 has no way to distinguish 
between aerosols, ice or water.

SPP100 - The SPP100 and FSSP100 probes use the same
optics but different electronics to measure both 
particles and small cloud droplets.  During the project 
the SPP100 was operated in the aerosol mode
(0.5 to 8 ?m). Comparisons of particle sizing showed 
good agreement with the other particle probes in the 
ranges where the measurements overlapped. The particle 
concentration data appear in the data set as CONCF_LPI. 
Other related measurements can be identified by the 
_LPI suffix. Like all 1-D optical probes, however, the 
SPP100 has no way to distinguish between aerosols, ice 
or water.

SSP300 - The SSP300 aerosol probe covers a range of
particle sizes that bridges the gap between the true
aerosols and the smaller droplets (0.3 - 20 ?m).  Like
all 1-D optical probes, however, the SSP300 has no way 
to distinguish between aerosols, ice or water.  In
addition, the optical particle sizing of the SSP300
can be affected by heavy concentrations of smaller 
hygroscopic particles. An intermittent malfunction in
the probe caused spiking in the data during certain 
flights.  Most of these intervals have been filled with 
the ‘missing data’ flag, but some will still be present 
in the data set.  The bad data can be clearly 
identified as periods with excessive values of particle 
concentration (CONC3).  The remainder of the data from 
this probe look good, with comparisons of particle 
sizing showing good agreement with the other particle 
probes in the ranges where the measurements overlapped.

Note: The bin sizes vary significantly in the particle
sizing routines for this probe.
 
260X - While the range of this probe is specified to be 
10 - 640 um in 10 um increments, it has some problems 
sampling the smaller sizes when mounted on an aircraft. 
NCAR data processing uses the Baumgardner correction 
alogrithms (Baumgardner, Korolev,1997; Airspeed 
Corrections for Optical Array Probe Sample Volumes, 
JTECH, 14, 1224-1229) to correct the 260X data for 
these problems. Effectively this changes the range of 
the unit to 50 - 640 ?m when it is mounted on the C-
130. The unit functioned well through out the program, 
but most cloud penetrations were limited to small 
cumulus clouds or scattered alto-stratus.  This has 
resulted in a very small sampling of droplets large 
enough to trigger the new minimum threshold on this 
precipitation probe.


    13. The TECO Model 49 ozone analyzer is a slow response 
instrument which provides 10 second - averaged values.  The 
corrected output (TEO3C) has been adjusted for variations in 
sample pressure and temperature.  Generally the instrument 
performed well.  Intermittent spikes do occur, but are fairly 
isolated and obvious to any User.  More information on the 
performance of this sensor, the fast response ozone system, and 
the modified TECO Model 48 carbon monoxide analyzer, appears in 
Appendix A.


   14.  Data recording typically begins well in advance of the 
actual aircraft takeoff time.  Virtually all measurements made on 
the aircraft require some sort of airspeed correction or the 
systems simply do not become active while the aircraft remains on 
the ground.  None of the data collected while the aircraft is on 
the ground should be considered as valid.

*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	




Section II:  Flight-by-Flight Summary

RF01 DPXC is DPBC. Lyman Alphas OK. Data system dropout (~20 seconds) 
     at 06:00. PLWCC, PLWCC1 ok for LWC. First 3 channels in SPP-300  
     noisy. They are turned off and set to zero.

RF02 DPXC is DPBC. For lyman alpha use MRLA1. Gerber PVM liquid water 
     probe (XGLWC) malfunctioned entire flight. Noise in first 3      
     channels of SPP-300 and they set to zero. Icing encountered 0542 
     to 0544. Some variables will be effected. I.e., ATTACK, SSLIP,   
     QCRC, WSC, etc. Ignore during this period.

RF03 FSSP-300 probe removed from C-130 for this flight. Many spikes in 
     GALT. Use ALTX instead. DPXC is DPBC.

RF04 Data system dropouts at 0912 and 0914 cause spikes in some       
     variables. DPXC is DPBC. Starting with this flight, the range of 
     sizes for PMS FSSP 100 probe was changed to 2 to 50 ?m. Lyman    
     alpha LA not functioning 0639 to 0948. The RAF engineer was      
     trouble shooting the SPP-300 on this flight and several changes  
     to detection thresholds to attempt to eliminate noise. For this  
     reason, FSSP-300 data should be considered to be unreliable for  
     this flight. 

RF05 DPXC is DPBC. FSSP-300 very noisy. First three bins set to zero.

RF06 DPXC is DPBC. PLWC hot wire malfunctioned. Radome pressure ports 
     iced-up from 0335 to 0343 causing the horizontal and vertical    
     winds to be unusable during this period.

RF07 DPXC is DPBC. PLWC hot-wire probe malfunctioned. 

RF08 DPXC is DPBC. SPP-300 has periodic noise and the first 3 bins are 
     set to zero.

RF09	Excessive oscillation in bottom dew pointer (DPB,DPBC)
	Top dew pointer (DPTC) used as reference humidity sensor.

	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.


RF10	PVM-100 liquid water probe (XGLWC) malfunctioning from
	3237 to 3240 CUT.

Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.


RF11	Dew pointers balanced during flight.  DPBC, DPTC, DPXC data
	bad from 2405 to 2430 CUT.

	Inertial Reference System showing excessive drift.  Use only 
	GPS position data for analysis.  GPS corrected winds are OK,
	but will be slightly less accurate.


RF12	Intermittent drop outs in GPS altitude signal (GALT).

	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.

	Intermittent drop outs in PVM-100 signal (XGLWC).

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) showing sensitivity to thermal
	Changes.  Data questionable.

	SPP-300 aerosol probe showing intermittent noise spikes.  Data
	Bad from 2702-2719, 2814-2816, 2930-2944, 3028-3132, and 3148-
	3208 CUT.


RF13	Intermittent drop outs in GPS altitude signal (GALT).

	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.

	Top dew pointer (DPTC) unresponsive from 2907 to 3145 CUT.

	Excessive noise in SPP-300 aerosol probe signal.  Data bad
	for the entire flight.

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) inoperative. Data bad
	for the entire flight.

	Data processing glitch affecting output of liquid water
	Sensors (PLWCC,PLWCC1,XGLWC).  Data bad from 2407 to 2426 CUT.


RF14	Top dew pointer malfunctioning (DPTC).  Data bad for flight.

	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.

	Excessive noise in SPP-300 aerosol probe signal.  Data bad
	for the entire flight.

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) inoperative. Data bad
	for the entire flight.


RF15	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) inoperative. Data bad
	for the entire flight.
	New sensor being used for top dew pointer (DPTC).  Response
	limited at larger dew point depressions.

	Calibration maneuvers conducted during the flight.


RF16	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.

	Top dew pointer (DPTC) unresponsive from 2349 to 2457 CUT.
	Response limited at larger dew point depressions.

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) inoperative. Data bad
	for the entire flight.

	PVM-100 liquid water probe (XGLWC) malfunctioning from
	2543 to 2616 CUT.

	Intermittent short periods of drift in remote surface 
	temperature signal (RSTB).


RF17	Top dew pointer malfunctioning (DPTC).  Data bad for flight.

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) inoperative. Data bad
	for the entire flight.

	Intermittent drop outs in GPS altitude signal (GALT).

RF18	Top dew pointer malfunctioning (DPTC).  Data bad for flight.

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) inoperative. Data bad
	for the entire flight.

	Intermittent drop outs in GPS altitude signal (GALT).

	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.

	Radome dynamic pressure (QCRC) iced up from 2439 to 2448 CUT.
	fuselage sensor (QCFC) used as reference for calculation of 
	true air speed for the entire flight.

	Initiation error in processing of cross flow lyman-alpha 
(VLA1,MRLA1,RHOLA1).  Data questionable from 0019 to 2544 CUT.


RF19	Top dew pointer malfunctioning (DPTC).  Data bad for flight.

	Stub lyman-alpha (VLA,MRLA,RHOLA) inoperative. Data bad
	for the entire flight.

	Heated temperature sensor malfunctioning (ATWH).  Data bad for
	Entire flight.

	Drift in ambient temperature sensor ATRL at low altitudes.

SPP-300 aerosol probe showing intermittent noise spikes.  Data
	Bad from 2340-2648 and 2950-3023 CUT.



*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	


