

24 October 2000




#0-828


Dr. Fred Fehsenfeld
NOAA-Aeronomy Lab
Boulder, Colorado


Dear Dr. Fred:   

Enclosed is the final documentation for the airborne measurements performed with the Electra during the AESOP / TEXAQS-2000 project from 15 August to 15 September 2000.  The standard (1 Hz) data set for all flights is now available via 'ftp' or on magnetic tape upon request. Software is available at RAF to view these data in a summary format. Access is also possible through individual science accounts with the NCAR computer center. High rate (25 Hz) data have not been processed at this time but will be made available on a flight-by-flight basis.  Distribution of these data will be made in response to individual requests by the project participants.  A long term archive of the  data set will be maintained on the NCAR mass storage system. 

Both raw and processed data are backed up on the NCAR mass storage system.  This has proven to be a reliable archive.  

Several items enclosed with this letter should be considered part of the data package and are important to your analysis of the flight data.  A copy of all of this information will be forwarded to any scientist requesting copies of the data set or it can be accessed through the RAF web site.  They are:


 1.	Output Tape Log: A complete list of information on the processed data files

2. Research Flight Reports: Flight summaries including general information on arrival & departure times, data recording 
	intervals, and full flight tracks.

 3.	Data Quality Report: A review of the general limitations of the data set along with flight-by-flight documentation of data concerns.

Dr. Fred Fehsenfeld
24 October 2000
Page 2



4.   Summary of Inertial Reference System performance, including
	final terminal position and ground speed errors for each 
	flight.

 5.	Bulletin No. 9: RAF documentation that describes the characteristics of each measurement and the algorithms used in data processing.  This bulletin also provides information on the netCDF format used for archiving the data.

 6.	Bulletin No. 23: RAF documentation that describes air motion measurement techniques on the NCAR research aircraft. This bulletin also discusses the in-flight calibration maneuvers, their purpose and interpretation.

 7.  Bulletin No. 24: RAF documentation that describes the
operational characteristics and limitations of the cloud
microphysical and particle measurement systems used on the NCAR
research aircraft.

 8.	Aircraft Research Instrumentation Configuration: Sensors, signal conditioners, filters and sample rates.

 9.	Summary of Project Calibrations: Note that the calibration coefficients and primary sensors used for all derived parameters are identified on the header of each data file. 

10.	List of parameters provided by the final data processing.

11.	Output Tape Format Description
 a) netCDF
 b) 1 Hz processed data. 

12.	Video Film Logs - Documentation on VCR records made during the research flights



It is essential that we have your evaluation of our work. 
Dr. David Carlson, the Director of the Atmospheric Technology Division, will call you soon -- by now he may already have contacted you.  He will follow up with a letter several months after you have received the data.  This procedure provides you with a means to help us improve in the future.		
Dr. Fred Fehsenfeld      
24 October 2000
Page 3




As you proceed with the analysis of the data, you may have questions, encounter problems, or uncover discrepancies or other aspects of the data that may be of interest to the RAF and to other users.  These should be brought to the attention of Allen Schanot or Bruce Morley, the Project Managers, or to my attention.

We are pleased to serve as major providers of information to the AESOP / TEXAQS-2000 program, as it was an exciting project.  We look forward to assisting you and the other investigators as the analysis of those data proceeds.  If I can be of further help, please do not hesitate to call.

Sincerely,



Jeffrey L. Stith, Ph.D.
Manager, Research Aviation Facility




Enclosures

cc:	D. Carlson
