                    Data Quality Report
                  NRL P3 - Project #2-301
                              IHOP
                       Parsons, et al

                            by

                      	   Allen Schanot 

      This summary has been written to outline basic 
instrumentation problems affecting the data set and is not 
intended to point out every bit of questionable data.  It is 
hoped that this information will facilitate use of the data as 
the research concentrates on specific flights and times.

      The following report covers only the RAF supplied 
instrumentation and is organized into two sections.  The first 
section lists recurring problems, general limitations, and 
systematic biases in the standard RAF measurements.  The second 
section lists isolated problems occurring on a flight-by-flight 
basis.  

Section I:  General Discussion

      1. Aircraft position, ground speed, and attitude are 
provided by a Honeywell Inertial Laser Reference System 
(IRS).  The values of PITCH, ROLL, and THDG are recorded at 
50 sps and are highly accurate.  However, the position and 
ground speed data are susceptible to long term drift known 
as the Schuler oscillation, typically reducing their 
accuracy over the duration of a flight.  A Trimble Global 
Positioning System (GPS) was used as a more accurate 
position reference during the program. When the GPS is 
working properly it can provide data with an accuracy of 
better than 100 meters in position and 1 meter/sec in ground 
speed. The GPS provides a good absolute measurement over the 
entire duration of a flight while the IRS provides a good 
relative measurement and is good for short term variations. 

Both systems generally performed well and the GPS position 
values are recommended for all research efforts.  However, 
sharp turns do occasionally interrupt the reception from 
some satellites.  These cases are characterized by a small, 
instantaneous shift in position and thus ground speed.  Once 
the aircraft has come out of the turn the track will 
typically shift back, but the wind calculations can be 
adversely affected by the resulting discontinuities in the 
key input variables.  Rather than use the GPS data directly, 
the RAF uses the GPS parameters to correct the position and 
ground speed errors that are inherent in the IRS 
measurements. The simplest way to take advantage of the 
relative strengths of these two measurements when both are 
present is to apply a low pass filter to the GPS 
measurements and the complementary high pass filter to the 
IRS measurements and then add the two. The RAF algorithm 
accomplishes this with the addition of some tests and 
corrections for when the GPS signal is not present.  For the 
most accurate data with smooth transitions under all 
conditions, RAF recommends that the LATC/LONC position data 
be used. 


2.	The wind data for this project were derived from 
measurements taken with the radome wind gust package.  As is 
the case with all wind gust systems, the ambient wind 
calculations can be adversely affected by either sharp 
changes in the aircraft's flight attitude or excessive drift 
in the onboard inertial reference system (IRS).  Turns, or 
more importantly, climbing turns are particularly disruptive 
to this type of measurement technique.  Wind data reported 
for these conditions should be used with caution.  As an 
additional enhancement to this data set, a second pass 
correction was applied to the wind data using position and 
ground speed updates provided by the GPS positioning system. 
Both the GPS corrected and uncorrected values are included 
in the final data set. 

	3.  The aircraft true airspeed (TASX) is a critical 
measurement that factors into most of the in-situ data 
calculations.  Redundant dynamic pressure sensors (QCR, QCF) 
are included in the instrumentation package to prevent any 
loss of data in this critical area.  The two systems 
functioned well throughout the project and exhibited 
excellent correlation under most all conditions.  QCF was 
elected as the reference sensor for all of the IHOP flights. 
Note that the RAF uses a ?wet? airspeed in the calculation 
of true airspeed.  In moist conditions this correction can 
be as great as 0.5 m/s.  Due to an intermittent problem with 
the dew point sensor, several flights had to be processed 
using a ?dry? true airspeed.  Specific flights where this 
occurred are identified in the flight-by-flight  section of 
this QA summary.  Note that there will be a slight 
degradation in the accuracy of the 3-D wind data for those 
flights.


 	4.  Temperature measurements were made using a standard  
unheated (ATRR) Rosemount temperature sensor.  While fast and 
accurate, this sensor is susceptible to wetting during cloud 
penetrations.  While the system appeared to function well, there 
was no redundant temperature measurement on the P-3 for a QA 
comparison.  An evaluation of the pre & post project calibrations 
showed a stable response over the duration of the field 
deployment.


5.	 Humidity measurements were made using a thermoelectric
dew point sensor and an experimental TDL laser hygrometer.  The 
TDL hygrometer experienced a number of problems associated with 
its mounting location in the P-3 bomb-bay that resulted in 
frequent data losses.  Due to a lack of data continuity, and the 
complex, pressure dependent calibration of the TDL, the dew point 
sensor was used as the reference input for all of the derived 
humidity variables.  Note that the TDL data have been removed for 
the initial data sets.  We expect to append those data to the 
IHOP archive at a later date.  In general terms, the dew point 
sensor functioned fairly well.  There were short intervals on 
several flights where the unit failed to get an initial optical 
signal lock on takeoff.  We feel that this was due to excessive 
wetting of the system by local rainstorms while the aircraft was 
on the ground.  In most instances the system was successfully 
reset in flight through a re-balancing of the sensor optics.  
During flight RF10, however, the unit failed to recover and all 
humidity data were lost.  The unit was replaced between flights 
RF10 and RF11.  There was no redundant dew point sensor available 
either as a QA comparison or as a fill in data source. 




6.	 The altitude of the aircraft was measured in several 
ways. The primary measurement (PALT,PALTF) is derived from the 
static pressure using the hydrostatic equation and the U.S. 
Standard Atmosphere, which assumes a constant surface pressure of 
1013 mb and a base surface temperature of 288 oK.  Whenever the 
aircraft is operating in areas that significantly differ from 
this basic profile, adjustments are typically made to the input 
constants to improve the calculation.  In this case the input 
surface temperature was changed to 305 oK for all flights

The inertial reference system outputs a similar measurement of 
altitude (ALT) by combining static pressure measurements with 
vertical accelerations.  These outputs are well correlated but no 
adjustment can be made to this value for operations in conditions 
that vary significantly from the standard atmosphere. 

The GPS positioning system also provides an MSL altitude (GALT). 
In the past this output was ?de-tuned? by the military and was 
not particularly useful due to a superimposed oscillation of +-
150 m.  However, the signal has now been cleaned up and is 
unaffected by changes in the surface pressure or temperature.  
The RAF uses GALT as the primary input for the calculation of the 
reference MSL altitude (ALTX).  Small discontinuities in GALT, 
resulting from switches in the satellite ?lock? configuration are 
smoothed out using the IRU altitude data. 

Data from the pilot?s radar altimeter were recorded during the 
project. The unit (RALTM) provides high precision data from the 
surface to a maximum altitude of roughly 1200 meters AGL.  Once 
the maximum limit on RALTM has been exceeded the signal becomes 
very noisy and will eventually peg out at a maximum limit. 




      7.  Data recording typically begins well in advance of the 
actual aircraft takeoff time.  During flight rf09 the data system 
was even left running during a short maintenance stop in the middle 
of the flight. Virtually all measurements made on the aircraft 
require some sort of airspeed correction or the systems are simply 
not active while the aircraft remains on the ground.  None of the 
data collected while the aircraft is on the ground should be 
considered as valid.

Problems with data streams that have been identified in this quality 
assurance process have been noted in the following section.  In order 
to avoid any confusion or misinterpretation of the data provided by 
RAF, the output from systems deemed to be bad for an entire flight 
have been replaced with the missing data flag: -32767.




      *	*	*	*	*	*	*	*








Section II:  Flight-by-Flight Summary


RF01 
*	Excessive oscillation in the dew point sensor.  All humidity
   data are bad from 163440 - 170005 CUT.  Dry true airspeed 
   used in 3-D winds calculations.
      
RF02	
*	Optical balance of the dew point sensor. All humidity
   data are bad from 180919 - 181352 CUT. 

RF04
*	Center Radome dynamic pressure port obstructed by water or 
ice. Data for QCR, QCRC and TASR are bad from 185526 - 185700 
CUT. 

RF06	
*	Dew point sensor fails to reach optical lock at takeoff.
   All humidity data are bad from 161400 - 165620 CUT. Dry true  
   airspeed used in 3-D winds calculations.

RF07	
*	Dew point sensor fails to reach optical lock at takeoff.
   All humidity data are bad from 161000 - 172830 CUT. Dry true  
   airspeed used in 3-D winds calculations.

RF08	
*	Optical balance of the dew point sensor. All humidity
        data are bad from 190836 - 190948 CUT

RF09
*	Aircraft on the ground during the middle of the flight.
Data recording continued and flight identification maintained. 
All data bad from 171300 - 181600 CUT.

RF10	
*	Dew point sensor fails to reach optical lock at takeoff.
System never recovers.  All humidity data are bad for the 
entire flight. Dry true airspeed used in 3-D winds 
calculations.

RF12
*	Dew point sensor fails to reach optical lock at takeoff.
   All humidity data are bad from 164700 - 171120 CUT. 
   Subsequent optical balances result in more data losses
   from 232350 - 232630 and 234634 - 234912 CUT.  Dry true
   airspeed used in 3-D winds calculations.


RF13	
*	Optical balance of the dew point sensor. All humidity
        data are bad from 171142 - 171554 CUT

*	Excessive drift in IRU position data (LAT, LON).  Raw ground 
speed components affected as well.  GPS correction algorithm
   should be adequate to correct 3-D wind field, however.  

RF16	
*	Dew point sensor fails to reach optical lock at takeoff.
   All humidity data are bad from 105300 - 113530 CUT. 
   Subsequent optical balance resulted in more data losses
   from 180400 - 181400 CUT.  Dry true airspeed used in 3-D winds 
   calculations.

RF18 
*	Dew point sensor fails to reach optical lock at takeoff.
   All humidity data are bad from 152600 - 155200 CUT. 

RF20	
*	Optical balance of the dew point sensor. All humidity
        data are bad from 181500 - 182200 CUT.







      *	*	*	*	*	*	*	*

