This site contains the final documentation for the airborne measurements obtained from the NCAR/NSF Research Aviation Facility (RAF) EC-130Q Hercules aircraft during the Passing Efficiency of the Low-Turbulence Inlet (PELTI) project.  This project took place from 5-23 July 2000.

Orders for the low rate (LRT; 1 sample per second) production data set may be directed to the RAF data manager, Ron Ruth (rafdmg@ucar.edu).  The data files are also available via anonymous ftp transfer; click here.  Software to be used in viewing the low rate data in summary format is available from the RAF.  Please consult the RAF Software Product Guide (http://raf.atd.ucar.edu/Software/index.html) for more information on available RAF data  perusal programs.  High rate data will be processed and distributed on an "as requested" basis in response to individual requests by the project participants.

Both the raw and production output data from the C-130 have been archived to the NCAR/SCD Mass Store System (MSS).  The latter has proven to be an extremely reliable archival platform.  However, we strongly urge data recipients to make their own archival copies in order to protect against damage or loss.

As you proceed with analysis of your data, you may have questions, encounter problems, or uncover discrepancies or other aspects of the data set that may be of interest to the RAF and other users.  We ask that you bring these issues to the attention of the PELTI project manager:

	Krista Laursen, krista@ucar.edu, (303)497-1031
	FAX phone number:  (303)497-1092
	Mail address:

		National Center for Atmospheric Research
		ATD/Research Aviation Facility
		P.O. Box 3000
		Boulder, CO 80307-3000
		U.S.A.

We also solicit your more general comments on the quality, usefulness, and/or new applications of the data.

We hope that the support of this project provided by the Research Aviation Facility has been satisfactory.  It has been our pleasure to serve you.  If we can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to call on us.

Sincerely,

Jeffrey L. Stith, Ph.D.					Krista Laursen
Manager, Research Aviation Facility			Project Manager/Associate Scientist

