									    12 December 2001
  	   EPIC-2001
              NCAR C-130 - Project #1-161
                 Data Quality Report
    

This summary has been written to outline basic 
instrumentation problems affecting the quality of the data set 
and is not intended to point out every bit of questionable data. 
It is hoped that this information will facilitate use of the data 
as the research concentrates on specific flights and times.

The following report covers only the RAF supplied 
instrumentation and is organized into two sections.  The first 
section lists recurring problems, general limitations, and 
systematic biases in the standard RAF measurements.  The second 
section lists isolated problems occurring on a flight-by-flight 
basis.  A discussion of the performance of the SABL lidar and RAF 
chemistry sensors will be provided separately, as will the 
respective data sets.

Section I: General Discussion

      1. RAF staff have reviewed the data set for 
instrumentation problems.  When an instrument has been found 
to be malfunctioning, specific time intervals are noted.  In 
those instances the bad data intervals have been filled in 
the netCDF data files with the missing data code of -32767. 
In some cases a system will be out for an entire flight.

 	2. The wind data for this project were derived from 
measurements taken with the radome wind gust package.  As is 
normally the case with all wind gust systems, the ambient 
wind calculations can be adversely affected by either sharp 
changes in the aircraft's flight attitude or excessive drift 
in the onboard inertial reference system (IRS).  Turns, or 
more importantly, climbing turns are particularly disruptive 
to this type of measurement technique.  Wind data reported 
for these conditions should be used with caution.

Special sets of in-flight calibration maneuvers were 
conducted on flights TF01 and RF17 to aid in the performance 
analysis of the wind gust measurements.  The calibration 
data identified a systematic bias in the pitch and sideslip 
parameters. These offsets have been removed from the final 
data set.  The time intervals for each set of maneuvers have 
been documented in both the flight-by-flight data quality 
review and on the individual Research Flight Forms prepared 
for each flight. Drift in the IRS accelerometers are removed 
using an algorithm that employs a complementary high-
pass/low-pass filter that removes the long term drift with 
the accurate GPS reference and preserves the shorter term 
fluctuations measured by the IRS. 

Both the GPS corrected and basic uncorrected values are 
included in the final data set.  RAF strongly recommends 
that the GPS corrected inertial winds be used for all 
research efforts (WSC,WDC,UXC,VYC,WIC,UIC,VIC).  

3. A Trimble Global Positioning System (GPS) was used 
as a more accurate position reference during the program.  
The system performed extremely well and the GPS position 
values should be used for all research efforts (GLAT, GLON). 
There may be occasional spikes in these due to satellite 
geometry and aircraft maneuvering. The algorithm referred to 
in (2) above also blends the GPS and IRS position to yield a 
best position (LATC, LONC) that generally removes the GPS 
spikes. 

4. RAF flies redundant sensors to assure data quality. 
Performance characteristics differ from sensor to sensor 
with certain units being more susceptible to various thermal 
and dynamic effects than others.  Good comparisons were 
typically obtained between the two static pressures 
(PSFDC,PSFC), the three standard temperatures (ATRL, ATRR, 
ATWH), two dynamic pressures (QCRC, QCFC), three liquid 
water sensors (PLWCC, PLWCC1, XGLWC), and the two dew 
pointers (DPT,DPB).  Exceptions are noted in the flight-by-
flight summary.  The digital static pressure (PSFDC) was 
selected as the reference pressure (PSXC) used in all of the 
derived parameters.  The two remote surface temperature 
sensors (RSTB, RSTB1) generally functioned well, but there 
were times when the two measurements differ significantly. 

5. Temperature measurements were made using the 
standard heated (ATWH) and unheated (ATRR,ATRL) Rosemount 
temperature sensors along with the OPHIR-III near-field 
radiometric temperature sensor (OAT, XOAT).  The sensing 
element from ATRL became damaged during flight RF04 and was 
subsequently replaced.  Both unheated sensors (ATRR,ATRL) 
were damaged during icing incidents encountered on flight 
RF07, resulting in fixed offset adjustments to the 
calibration factors for both systems. During the following 
flights, all of the standard temperature sensors performed 
reasonably well, encountering the usual problems with sensor 
wetting during cloud passes. Post project calibration of the 
resistance changes in the elements in both sensor heads 
quantified the adjustments needed for the production 
processing of the final data set. A comparison of the data 
sets when all systems were functional yielded good 
correlation in instrument signatures and only small 
differences in absolute value (?0.2 ?C) through out the 
program. ATWH was selected as the reference value (ATX) used 
in calculating the derived parameters. 


The OPHIR-III sensor was flown because it is not sensitive to 
interference from sensor wetting or icing.  Measurements are 
derived from near field radiometric emissions in an infared 
frequency band. The integrated sample volume of the unit is 
designed to extend roughly 10 meters out from the aircraft.  In 
actual practice there appears to have been some degradation of 
the filters serving to limit this viewing depth.  Since the unit 
points out roughly horizontally, the increased viewing depth is 
not a problem during normal straight and level flight.  During 
significant turns where the ROLL angle exceeds +-5 degrees, 
however, the OPHIR temperature will be influenced by the 
combination of the increased sampling depth and the vertical 
gradient in ambient temperature.  Typically, differences in ATX 
and OAT during these turns are around +-0.75 oC.  While the unit 
performed quite well and its output was generally well correlated 
to the in-situ temperature sensors, it is susceptible to in-
flight calibration drift and experienced some intermittent 
segments where the system seemed to lose its lock. These periods 
are characterized by a sudden level shift and, in some cases, the 
loss of response to the fine scale structure in the temperature 
profile.   

In order to assist in the analysis of these data, RAF has output 
two different OPHIR temperatures in the final data set.  The 
standard OAT data were obtained from a direct calculation of 
ambient temperature using a calibration fit to clear air data 
taken from the reference Rosemount temperature sensor during 
level flight.  RAF has great confidence in this calibration fit 
because it works well for all 19 research flights.  No flight-by-
flight adjustments were necessary.  A second value (XOAT) was 
produced through the use of our 'loose couple' data processing 
technique that has been modified slightly to recognize and adjust 
for the level shifts caused by the malfunction noted above.  

Because this is not an independent, stand alone measurement, use 
of the OPHIR data should be strictly limited to the direct cloud 
penetrations where the standard sensors have a problem with 
sensor wetting.  


 	6.  Humidity measurements were made using two collocated 
thermoelectric dew point sensors, two Lyman-alpha fast response 
hygrometers and an experimental TDL laser hygrometer.   Generally 
speaking, the humidity sensors performed well.  As is typically 
the case, the two dew point sensors (DPBC,DPTC) were set up 
differently to provide the best coverage under the widest range 
of ambient conditions.  DPTC was set up for fast response, but 
its dynamic range was more limited. DPBC had a slower response 
but had the capability of measuring greater dew point 
depressions. A comparison of the data sets yielded good 
correlation in instrument signatures during the largest portions 
of the flights when both instruments were functioning normally.  
However, some problems with water ingestion occurred which 
resulted in some sensor drift.  Each flight was evaluated on a 
case-by-case basis to see which dew point sensor was functioning 
the best on that particular flight. Except where noted in the 
flight-by-flight review, DPBC was used as the reference humidity 
sensor (DPXC) in calculating all of the derived parameters.

Lyman-alpha hygrometers are susceptible to in-flight drift 
in the instrument's bias voltage.  Due to this problem, RAF uses 
a special data processing technique to remove the bias drift by 
referencing the long term humidity values to one of the more 
stable thermoelectric dew point sensors.  Measurements from the 
two systems remained well correlated for clear air sampling but 
showed significant differences during cloud penetrations.  The 
two Lyman-alpha hygrometers use different housing types.  The 
stub unit (MRLA,RHOLA,DPLA,RHLA) is more susceptible to in-cloud 
wetting and thermal drift.  This unit failed during the project 
and had to be replaced.  The replacement system also failed late 
in the project.  To avoid any confusion over possible bad data 
from this system, all of the related variables have been removed 
from the final data set.  The cross-flow unit (MRLA1, RHOLA1, 
DPLA1, RHLA1) functioned well under all conditions and should be 
perfectly adequate as the reference high rate sensor for basic 
analysis. For flux calculations, MRLA1 should be used.

A TDL (tunable diode laser) based hygrometer was flown on an 
experimental basis for this project.  The system was originally 
designed for measuring extremely low absolute humidities at 
stratospheric altitudes.  The path length was shortened for the 
unit when it was placed on the C-130 to at the higher humidities 
common to the boundary layer and mid to lower troposphere.  While 
the humidity values encountered during this deployment were 
within the expected operational range of the instrument a complex 
pressure calibration and special data processing are required to 
correct the basic data.  At the time of this data release, the 
TDL data were not fully corrected and should only be used to 
identify trend problems with the primary humidity sensors (ie: 
overshooting or oscillation in dew pointers).  We expect a 
subsequent release of a 'corrected' set of TDL data (MRLHS) at a 
later date.

 7. A set of standard upward and downward facing radiometers 
were used to measure shortwave, ultraviolet, and infrared 
irradiance. It should be noted that all units are hard mounted 
and that none of the raw data have been corrected for changes in 
the aircraft's flight attitude. RAF has recently added a new set 
of irradiance parameters which have been corrected for aircraft 
attitude and relative sun angle.  A description of this 
correction process is provided in RAF Bulletin 9. 

8. Thermal temperature chamber experiments have indicated 
that the Heimann sensors used to remotely measure the surface 
temperature (RSTB, RSTB1) are sensitive to some thermal drift.   
In an attempt to deal with these problems the units were equipped 
with a temperature control heater system.  Generally speaking, 
the heater system stabilized the signals fairly well.  Some drift 
is still apparent in the data set.  RSTB1 seemed to be the more 
stable of the two units and exhibited better accuracy in the 
regular, single point, precision tests run prior to each flight. 
RSTB1 is therefore recommended as the reference system for this 
measurement. 
 
In addition to their thermal sensitivity, the accuracy of 
the remote sensing measurement is also dependent upon the total 
amount of water in the sensing path.  In such a moist, marine 
environment this sensitivity appears as an altitude dependence in 
the raw surface temperature. Using a compilation of vertical 
soundings from all of the research flights, RAF was able to 
empirically generate a mean moisture vertical profile that could 
be used to characterize the conditions encountered during the 
research flights.  To aid in the analysis of these data RAF has 
added a special calculation of sea surface temperature (XTSURF) 
to the final data set which makes a rough attempt to account for 
this dependency. 

	9. The altitude of the aircraft was measured in several 
ways.  A pressure based altitude (PALT,PALTF) is derived from the 
static pressure using the hydrostatic equation and normally using 
the U.S. Standard Atmosphere, which assumes a constant surface 
pressure of 1013mb and a mean surface temperature of 288 ?C. Due 
to the tropical nature of the research area for EPIC2001, better 
results were obtained by using a mean surface temperature of 305 
oC.

A radar altimeter (HGM232) was onboard the aircraft for the 
project.  This unit worked well and, due to the fact that most of 
the research was conducted over a water surface, showed an 
excellent correlation with the calculated pressure altitude.  

	The GPS positioning system also provides an altitude readout 
(GALT).  The military has removed the electronic dithering of 
this signal that used to prevent its use by research aircraft.
This output now provides a fairly accurate MSL latitude based on 
a ellipsoid model of the Earth (WGS-84).  The signal recorded on 
the C-130 can still be interrupted during steep turns. 

	To aid the Users in choosing a common altitude to use in 
their analyses, RAF now calculates a 'reference' altitude (ALTX). 
The output is based directly upon GALT and uses basic smoothing 
techniques to fill gaps with Inertial altitude data when the GPS 
signal is interrupted.

10.  Two hot wire liquid water sensors were used on the C-
130 at the start of the program.  The PMS King Probes (PLWCC, 
PLWCC1) worked well during the program but the sensing elements 
were susceptible to frequent damage caused by the large 
precipitation encountered during the routine cloud penetrations. 
In order to conserve enough sensing elements to complete the 
field deployment, only one system was flown on each flight 
(PLWCC1) after flight RF07.  A comparison of the two units 
yielded a good correlation in instrument signatures and only 
small differences in absolute value. Special note should be made 
of the fact that both these instruments are calibrated for a 
specific range of aircraft speeds.  Small changes in the baseline 
are apparent with speed changes, as are small zero offsets.  Each 
cloud penetration will require a baseline adjustment with the 
relative change providing the sampled liquid water content.  Due 
to the nature of this sampling technique, it should be clear that 
water contained in ice particles will not be observed. This fact 
should be taken into account when comparing data from these 
sensors with the calculated liquid water content obtained from 
the optical particle probes.

A Gerber Model PVM-100 liquid water probe was included in 
the research instrumentation package.  The unit responded well to 
the presence of liquid water, but exhibited a large baseline 
offset that was strongly dependent upon changes in the aircraft 
true airspeed.  Calibration for this unit comes from the 
manufacturer. During final data processing the RAF loose couple 
technique was used to remove some of the remaining baseline 
drift.  Note that a comparison between these data, the King Probe 
measurements and the equivalent liquid water content calculated 
from the SPP-100 probe can vary significantly, depending on the 
cloud type and droplet spectra.  Both of the direct measurement 
systems are less effective in measuring the water in the larger 
droplet sizes (greater than100 um) and are basically unresponsive 
to ice particles where the SPP-100 probe samples all particles 
but can't differentiate between ice and water.

      11. The calculation of CN sized aerosol particle 
concentrations (CONCN) is dependent upon total particle counts 
(CNTS) and the measurement of sample flow (FCN,FCNC).  NOTE: the 
internal sample flow (FCN) has been corrected (FCNC) to ambient 
conditions, only, and not to STP for the calculation of particle 
concentration.  NOTE: the length of the tubing connecting the 
inlet to the counter will induce a 2 second lag in the system 
response to changes in particle concentration.

In the past, droplet shattering during cloud penetrations would 
sharply increase the number of counts and falsely increase 
indicated CN concentrations by several orders of magnitude. A new 
inlet system has been in use for several projects, specifically 
designed to avoid this problem and provide good interstitial, in-
cloud aerosol measurements.  However, based on the results from 
this project, it now appears that the new inlet can still be 
affected by this problem in warm clouds with large droplets.

12.	Six PMS particle probes (SSP300, SPP100, SPP200, 260X, 
2D-C, 2D-P) were used on the project.   Some specific 
details on each of the probes are summarized below:

SPP200 - The SPP200 aerosol particle probe functioned 
extremely well during the project.  The probe being 
flown  has been modified in order to directly measure 
the sample flow through the instrument.  These data, 
recorded as PFLWC_WDL, have been used in the 
calculation of particle concentrations to provide a 
more accurate measurement of aerosol concentrations.
Due to the sampling technique employed by this probe
it is not suitable for use in clouds.

SSP100 - The SSP100 cloud droplet probe functioned
extremely well. Weekly servicing and re-calibration of
the sensor optics provided good documentation for data
processing.  Being an optical scattering probe, the
SSP100 has no way of distinguishing between ice 
particles and water droplets. Therefore, the liquid 
water content calculated from this probe (PLWCF_IBR) 
should be used with caution in this application. 

SSP300 - The SSP300 aerosol probe covers a range of
particle sizes that bridges the gap between the true
aerosols and the smaller droplets (0.3 - 20 ?m).  Like
all 1-D optical probes, however, the SSP300 has no way 
to distinguish between aerosols, ice or water.  Counts 
in the lowest 3 bin sizes were contaminated by 
excessive electronic noise.  Data from those channels 
have been removed from the calculation of total 
particle concentration.

Note: The bin sizes vary significantly in the particle
sizing routines for this probe.
 
260X - While the range of this probe is specified to be 
10 - 640 um in 10 um increments, it has some problems 
sampling the smaller sizes when mounted on an aircraft. 
NCAR data processing uses the Baumgardner correction 
alogrithms (Baumgardner, Korolev,1997; Airspeed 
Corrections for Optical Array Probe Sample Volumes, 
JTECH, 14, 1224-1229) to correct the 260X data for 
these problems. Effectively this changes the range of 
the unit to 50 - 640 ?m when it is mounted on the C-
130. The unit functioned well through out the program

2D-C/2D-P - Both of the two-dimensional imaging probes 
performed extremely well throughout the program.  New 
data processing techniques convert the image data into 
1-D equivalent particle size distribution and total 
particle concentration data that have been included in 
the general data set.  The actual image data have been 
archived separately.  Access to the images will require 
the use of specialized software routines that may 
necessitate direct assistance from the RAF staff.  

    13. The TECO Model 49 ozone analyzer is a slow response 
instrument which provides 10 second - averaged values.  The 
corrected output (TEO3C) has been adjusted for variations in 
sample pressure and temperature.  Generally the instrument 
performed well.  Intermittent spikes do occur, but are fairly 
isolated and obvious to any User.  More information on the 
performance of this sensor and the modified TECO Model 48 carbon 
monoxide analyzer, appears in Appendix A.

   14.  Data recording typically begins well in advance of the 
actual aircraft takeoff time.  Virtually all measurements made on 
the aircraft require some sort of airspeed correction or the 
systems simply do not become active while the aircraft remains on 
the ground.  None of the data collected while the aircraft is on 
the ground should be considered as valid.

*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	





Section II:  Flight-by-Flight Summary

RF01	King Probe liquid water elements failed in flight due to damage
from large droplets.  PLWCC data bad from 1556 CUT to end of 
flight.  PLWCC1 data bad from 1925 CUT to end of flight.

RF02	Viewing port for upward looking remote temperature sensor was
	full of water.  RSTT data bad for the entire flight.

	OPHIR-III temperature sensor did not initialize properly.  OAT
and XOAT data bad from 1353 to 1408 CUT.

Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 2206 to 2220 CUT.

RF04	Top dew point sensor used as reference for this flight.

RF05	Top dew point sensor used as reference for this flight.

RF06	Top Dew Point Sensor loses its control lock.  DPT and DPTC data
bad from 2148 to 2200 CUT.

RF07	King Probe liquid water elements failed in flight due to damage
from large droplets.  PLWCC and PLWCC1 data bad for the entire 
flight.

Icing of center radome pressure port.  QCR, QCRC, and TASR data
bad from 1551 to 1630 and 1719 to 1755 CUT.  Data from heated 
fuselage pitot used in calculations of derived variables for the
entire flight.

Top dew point sensor used as reference for this flight.

Damage to sensing elements changes calibration of both unheated
temperature sensors in-flight.  Values of ATRR and ATRL uncertain
for entire flight.

RF08	Icing of center radome pressure port. QCR, QCRC, and TASR data
bad from 2039 to 2101 CUT.  Data from heated fuselage pitot used 
in calculations of derived variables for the entire flight.

Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 1528 to 1540 and 2207 to 2217 CUT.

Malfunction in PVM-100 liquid water sensor.  XGLWC data bad from
1324 to 1334 CUT.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

RF09	Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 1636 to 1645, 1715 to 1726 and 2107 to 2121 CUT.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

RF10	Icing of center radome pressure port. QCR, QCRC, and TASR data
bad from 2051 to 2152 CUT.  Data from heated fuselage pitot used 
in calculations of derived variables for the entire flight.

Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 2212 to 2230 CUT.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

RF11	Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 2205 to 2216 CUT.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

RF12	Viewing port for upward looking remote temperature sensor was
	Not open at takeoff.  RSTT data bad from 1430 to 1516 CUT.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

RF13	Icing of center radome pressure port. QCR, QCRC, and TASR data
bad from 1624 to 1655 CUT.  Data from heated fuselage pitot used 
in calculations of derived variables for the entire flight.

Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 1640 to 1734 and 2112 to 2201 CUT.


Malfunction in PVM-100 liquid water sensor.  XGLWC data bad from
1930 to 1935 CUT.

Sensor head on ATRR sensor was iced up.  ATRR data bad from 1637
To 1924 CUT.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

RF14	Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 1711 to 1743 and 2302 CUT to end of flight.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

RF15	Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 1717 to 1730 and 2257 to 2315 CUT.

Data system failure.  Complete data gap from 184051 - 184856 CUT.

Backup remote surface temperature showing excessive drift.  RSTB
data bad from 2110 CUT to end of flight.

Malfunction of SPP300 particle probe.  All data from this probe
are bad for the entire flight.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

Intermittent periods where the OPHIR-III temperature sensor loses
Signal lock.

RF16	Loss of signal from radar altimeter.  HGM232 data bad from 153352 
	to 153356 CUT.

Backup remote surface temperature showing excessive drift.  RSTB
data bad from 2143 to 2338 CUT.

SPP300 particle probe removed from aircraft.  All data from this
probe are bad for the entire flight.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

Intermittent periods where the OPHIR-III temperature sensor loses
Signal lock.

RF17	SPP300 particle probe removed from aircraft.  All data from this
probe are bad for the entire flight.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

Top dew point sensor used as reference for this flight.

	In-flight calibration maneuvers conducted from 2159 to 2232 CUT.

Intermittent periods where the OPHIR-III temperature sensor loses
Signal lock.


RF18	Icing of radome pressure ports. QCR, QCRC, ADIFR, BDIFR, TASR 
And all 3-D wind variable data bad from 2249 to 2259 and 2111 to 
2156 CUT.  Data from heated fuselage pitot used in calculations 
of derived variables for the entire flight.

Top dew point sensor loses signal lock.  DPT and DPTC data bad
from 1713 to 1723 CUT.

Malfunction of PMS260X particle probe.  All data from this probe
are bad for the entire flight.

Sensor head on ATRL sensor was iced up.  ATRR data bad from 1745
to 1940 CUT.

Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

Backup remote surface temperature showing excessive drift.  RSTB
data bad from 2109 CUT to end of flight.

Intermittent periods where the OPHIR-III temperature sensor loses
Signal lock.

RF19	Backup King probe removed from aircraft.  No PLWCC1 data for the
entire flight.

Backup remote surface temperature showing excessive drift.  RSTB
data bad from 2048 CUT to end of flight.

Intermittent periods where the OPHIR-III temperature sensor loses
Signal lock.














*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	


