         22 March 2004

   Ocean Waves / GOTEX Debrief


Summary:
 Allocation:  80 Research / 19 Test & Ferry
  Field OPS:   1 February - 1 March 2004
       Test:   3 flights / 8 hours
      Ferry:   2 flights / 12.4 hours
   Research:  11 flights / 68.2 out of 80 allocated

 1 planned 8-hour mission scrubbed due to pilot illness
 1 planned 8-hour mission terminated early due to mechanical failure

 1 3.3 hour mission primarily a demonstration flight for head of Mexican
     Weather Service

 1 4.7 hour mission used for trailing cone calibration and radome turbulence
     measurement evaluation

 Targeted conditions were encountered.  Typically one multi-day event
 per week.  Solid cases, but only one with wind speeds in excess of
 30 m/s in the boundary layer.  One of the missed flights likely would
 have been a second case.  Salt accumulation was so heavy as to
 require regular airframe and compressor washes by Huatulco Airport
 Fire Brigade.


Upload:

 Pre-installation of User equipment in RAF racks worked well.

 Scripps payload not complete at time of departure.  Second camera in
     stereographic setup finished after arrival.  Holidays!

 Request for modification of floor panels for in-flight access to
 belly-mounted equipment was denied.  We did modify one interior plate
 to facilitate cable runs to belly-mounted equipment and added conduit
 for sub-floor cable runs.

 Extra sensor mounting points (2) were added to help accommodate
 User-supplied equipment.  Alternate mounting used in final plan.
 User-supplied CO2 sensor was evaluated and found not to be
 airworthy on the C-130.  We were not asked to and did not volunteer
 to re-engineer the unit for use on the project.

 SABL wing pod, GPS Dropsonde & chute, and AXBT chute
 installations were normal.  User antenna provided for AXBT receiver.


Flight Testing:

 Normal.  Extra hours allocated to fly over Lake McConaughy to test
 User remote-sensing systems.  Some problems with the satellite data link.
 These were resolved by replacing the Irridium unit with our spare.


Shipping:

 Importer of Record ? Difficulty establishing someone.  Science permit
 required by Customs, but always late.  See Slaven report.

 Ground - Customs procedures appear different at direct border crossings.
   Shipment delayed 3 weeks in transit.  See Slaven report.

 Air Freight - With proper preparation, all pieces arrived on time.  One
   maintenance package delayed.

 C-130 - On site face-to-face interaction with local customs authorities
   during the inspection helped facilitate entry & clearance and exit.

 NASA - We added the crate with the GPS base station to our seatainer
   as courtesy to the PI?s.  Part of documentation problems with the
   ground shipment were tied to this crate.  Delay in arrival limited
   the functionality of the onboard NASA scanner.

 Expendables - Donated to UNAM to allow entry and use without import tariffs.
   Major problem for alternate methods.  Head of Mexican Weather Service
   indicated no resolution with official  participation.


Travel:

 Typical issues.  Price change for rental cars.  Kudos to Shannon.


Data Center:

 This is normally the responsibility of the PIs.  RAF/ATD agreed to
 provide basic services in the form of a LAN for data exchange and a
 link for everyone to the internet, although this had not been included
 in either the OFAP request or the RAF budget.  This was done via dial-up
 switched modem and worked as expected.  Some drop outs, but no long-term
 breaks in service.  Available bandwidth did limit file transfers.  ATD
 also shipped a satellite link down on a test basis in hopes of evaluating
 the system for use in other field projects and to improve data links for
 the current project.  Due to delayed shipping and hardware problems with
 the system, it was never put on line.


Instrumentation:

 The nature of the flight operations led to significant accumulation of
 sea salt on all sensors.  Some degradation of HRT response noted as
 flights progressed.  All exposed sensors cleaned after every flight.

 Lyman-alpha - Failure of secondary cross-flow unit.  Replaced with stub,
   but conditions considered too harsh to risk key components.  With PI
   unit as backup, flew bulk of missions with single RAF sensor.  Some HRT
   response degradation near end of project that cleaning could not fix.
   Key components no longer available.  Alternative HRT humidity sensors
   needed.

 King Probe - Backup unit failed early in the project.  Conditions hard on
   sensing elements with few spares available.  Since no cloud objectives,
   decided to fly bulk of project with single sensor.  PLWCC lasted for all
   research flights.

 CO2 - Problems with system early in the project.  See Campos.

 TDL - Problems with system early in the project.  See Campos.

 SABL - Normal function.  No specific problems.  Good data.

 Dropsondes - Tough application (5000 ft drops).  Reliability issues.

 HRT Temperature - Unstable unit replaced with last facility spare early in
   the project.  "New" spare also unstable.  Reference sensor good for whole
   project.  Alternative HRT temperature sensors needed.

 ADS - Short data gaps occurred on two of the research flights.  The first
   instance was a problem with the right pod DSM.  Gaps occurred when trying
   to re-sync that DSM with the other 3 DSMs following a disconnect.  Cause
   was later tied to a loose nut making contact with one of the boards.  No
   research data legs were affected.  All data loss during final approach into
   the airport.  Total data loss less than 5 minutes.  Second occurrence fixed
   itself during the investigation.  Cause is unknown, but again no research
   data legs were affected.  All  data loss occurred during ferry return to
   the airport.  Total data loss less than 4 minutes.

 Trailing Cone & Turbulence Measurements - Recently the trailing-cone pressure
   standard was used to check accuracy of the static and dynamic pressure
   measurements on the C-130, for the first time.  Data were limited to
   higher altitudes because of elevation of Jeffco.  PIs requested use of
   the trailing cone to do low-altitude calibrations during the project.
   Unused project research hours were used for this purpose.  On a connected
   topic, some doubts have been raised about the overall quality of the
   high-rate 3-D turbulence measurements made with the C-130's radome gust
   probe system.  This issue is under investigation.


Communications:

 Local cell phones provided good project communications, in country.
 Difficulty with out-bound international calls, particularly from the
 hotel.  ATD to obtain phones with worldwide capabilities.

 On-line chat provided best means of communications.  Cheap too.


Instrument Operator Training:

 Competition for available seats concerned the PIs.  The project was used
 as an opportunity to train new SABL and RAF chemistry operators on a
 non-interference basis.  PIs thought this was inappropriate - why no
 in-house hours for training?


OPS/Maintenance Procedures:

 Challenging flight profiles with extended periods at 100 ft AGL in strong
 crosswind conditions.  Responsive to PI adjustments.

 Fueling - Mixup in fuel payments.  Need better communications.  No impact
   on final costs.

 Staffing - Backups for illness, site and target dependent.  Henry back
   early when flight cancelled due to illness.

 Engine Oil cooler failure.  See report.

 ION Data - Excellent monitor of current status in unmonitored air space.
   Good safety check.


Conclusions:

 Solid data set suitable for addressing the PI's objectives.

 Responsive to numerous PI needs/requests.  Guided by standard
 facility procedures, the answer was not always - yes.
