									    8 June 2004
                       Ocean Waves (GOTEX)
              NCAR C-130 - Project #3-150
                  Data Quality Report


This summary has been written to outline basic instrumentation problems
affecting the quality of the data set and is not intended to point out every
bit of questionable data.  It is hoped that this information will facilitate
use of the data as the research concentrates on specific flights and times.

The following report covers only the RAF supplied instrumentation and is
organized into two sections.  The first section lists recurring problems,
general limitations, and systematic biases in the standard RAF measurements.
The second section lists isolated problems occurring on a flight-by-flight
basis.  A discussion of the performance of the SABL lidar, GPS dropsondes and
RAF chemistry sensors will be provided separately, as will the respective data
sets.

Section I: General Discussion

1.  RAF staff have reviewed the data set for instrumentation problems.  When
an instrument has been found to be malfunctioning, specific time intervals
are noted.  In those instances the bad data intervals have been filled in
the netCDF data files with the missing data code of -32767.  In some cases
a system will be out for an entire flight.

2.  The flight conditions targeted by the research were extremely detrimental
to the performance of many of the standard sensors.  Salt deposits from ocean
spray tended to accumulate on the sensors and fuselage over the course of
each flight.  In some instances sensor performance would degrade as the salt
accumulations increased.  All sensors were washed with fresh water after
each flight and the airframe was washed twice during the duration of field
operations.

3.  The wind data for this project were derived from measurements taken with
the radome wind gust package.  As is normally the case with all wind gust
systems, the ambient wind calculations can be adversely affected by either
sharp changes in the aircraft's flight attitude or excessive drift in the
onboard inertial reference system (IRS).  Turns, or more importantly, climbing
turns are particularly disruptive to this type of measurement technique.  Wind
data reported for these conditions should be used with caution.

Special sets of in-flight calibration maneuvers were conducted on flights
TF01, TF03, RF04 and RF11 to aid in the performance analysis of the wind gust
measurements.  The calibration data identified a systematic bias in the pitch
and sideslip parameters.  These offsets have been removed from the final data
set.  The time intervals for each set of maneuvers have been documented in
both the flight-by-flight data quality review and on the individual Research
Flight Forms prepared for each flight.  Drift in the IRS accelerometers are
removed using an algorithm that employs a complementary high-pass/low-pass
filter that removes the long term drift with the accurate GPS reference and
preserves the shorter term fluctuations measured by the IRS.

Both the GPS-corrected and basic uncorrected values are included in the final
data set.  RAF strongly recommends that the GPS corrected inertial winds be
used for all research efforts (WSC,WDC,UXC,VYC,WIC,UIC,VIC).

Note:  This data set was processed using the new pressure correction factors
empirically derived from comparisons against the trailing cone static pressure
reference.

4.  A Garmin Global Positioning System (GPS) was used as a more accurate
position reference during the program.  The system performed extremely well
and the GPS position values should be used for all research efforts (GGLAT,
GGLON).  There may be occasional spikes or discontinuous shifts in these
values due to satellite geometry and aircraft maneuvering.  The algorithm
referred to in (2) above also blends the GPS and IRS position to yield a
best position (LATC, LONC) that generally removes the GPS spikes.

5.  RAF flies redundant sensors to assure data quality.  Performance
characteristics differ from sensor to sensor with certain units being
more susceptible to various thermal and dynamic effects than others.  Good
comparisons were typically obtained between the two static pressures (PSFDC,
PSFC), the three standard temperatures (ATRL, ATRR, ATWH), three dynamic
pressures (QCRC, QCFC, QCFRC), and the two dew pointers (DPT,DPB).  Exceptions
are noted in the flight-by-flight summary.  The digital static pressure
(PSFDC) was selected as the reference pressure (PSXC) used in all of the
derived parameters.  The two remote surface temperature sensors (RSTB, RSTB1)
generally functioned well, but there were times when the two measurements
differ significantly.

6.  Temperature measurements were made using the standard heated (ATWH) and
unheated (ATRR, ATRL) Rosemount temperature sensors along with the OPHIR-III
near-field radiometric temperature sensor (OAT).  The sensing element from
ATRL tended to be slightly unstable showing small amounts of drift when
compared to the other two sensors.  Differences were less than 0.5 oC and
often closer to the standard 0.2 oC considered to be a good comparison.
An adjustment to the calibration of ATRL was made for flights after RF04 to
account for a specific shift caused by minor damage to the sensing element.
ATRR performance remained stable throughout the project so it was selected
as the reference value (ATX) used in calculating the derived parameters.

The OPHIR-III sensor was flown because it is not sensitive to interference
from sensor wetting or icing.  Measurements are derived from near-field
radiometric emissions in an infrared frequency band.  The integrated sample
volume of the unit is designed to extend roughly 10 meters out from the
aircraft.  In actual practice there appears to have been some degradation of
the filters serving to limit this viewing depth.  Since the unit points out
roughly horizontally, the increased viewing depth is not a problem during
normal straight-and-level flight.  During significant turns where the ROLL
angle exceeds +-5 degrees, however, the OPHIR temperature will be influenced
by the combination of the increased sampling depth and the vertical gradient
in ambient temperature.  Typically, differences in ATX and OAT during these
turns are around +-0.75 oC.  While the unit performed quite well and its
output was generally well correlated to the in-situ temperature sensors, it is
susceptible to in-flight calibration drift and experienced some intermittent
segments where the system seemed to lose its lock.  These periods are
characterized by a sudden level shift and, in some cases, the loss of response
to the fine-scale structure in the temperature profile.

Because this is not an independent, stand-alone measurement, use of the OPHIR
data should be strictly limited to the direct cloud penetrations where the
standard sensors have a problem with sensor wetting.

7.  Humidity measurements were made using two collocated thermoelectric dew
point sensors, one Lyman-alpha fast-response hygrometer and an experimental
TDL laser hygrometer.  Two Lyman-alpha sensors were installed at the beginning
of the project, but after the failure of one unit on the initial research
flight it was determined that the adverse conditions targeted by the research
were detrimental to the survival of our spare (stub) units.  The remaining
flights were conducted with a single RAF sensor.  Note that an additional
HRT humidity measurement was being made by User-supplied instrumentation.
Generally speaking, the humidity sensors performed well.  As is typically the
case, the two dew point sensors (DPBC,DPTC) were set up differently to provide
the best coverage under the widest range of ambient conditions.  DPTC was
set up for fast response, but its dynamic range was more limited.  DPBC
had a slower response but had the capability of measuring greater dew point
depressions.  A comparison of the data sets yielded good correlation in
instrument signatures during the largest portions of the flights when both
instruments were functioning normally.  DPBC was used as the reference
humidity sensor (DPXC) in calculating all of the derived parameters.

Lyman-alpha hygrometers are susceptible to in-flight drift in the instrument's
bias voltage.  Due to this problem, RAF uses a special data-processing
technique to remove the bias drift by referencing the long-term humidity
values to one of the more stable thermoelectric dew point sensors.
Measurements from the RAF and User systems remained well correlated for
clear-air sampling.  The RAF cross-flow unit (MRLA, RHOLA, DPLA, RHLA)
functioned well under all conditions and should be perfectly adequate as the
reference high-rate sensor for basic analysis and flux calculations.  Note
that there was some degradation in the RAF Lyman-alpha signal late in the
project.

A TDL (tunable diode laser) based hygrometer was flown on an experimental
basis for this project.  The system was originally designed for measuring
extremely low absolute humidities at stratospheric altitudes.  The path length
was shortened for the unit when it was placed on the C-130 to allow it to
function at the higher humidities common to the boundary layer and mid to
lower troposphere.  While the humidity values encountered during this
deployment were within the expected operational range of the instrument,
a complex pressure calibration and special data processing are required
to correct the basic data.  At the time of this data release, the TDL data
were not fully corrected and have therefore been removed from this data set.
We expect a subsequent release of a "corrected" set of TDL data (MRLH) at
a later date.

8.  A set of standard upward- and downward-facing radiometers were used to
measure shortwave, ultraviolet, and infrared irradiance.  It should be noted
that all units are hard mounted and that none of the data have been corrected
for changes in the aircraft's flight attitude.  It was necessary to replace
the top-mounted UV sensor after flight RF02.

9.  Thermal temperature chamber experiments have indicated that the Heimann
sensors used to remotely measure the surface temperature (RSTB, RSTB1) are
sensitive to some thermal drift.  In an attempt to deal with these problems
the units were equipped with a temperature-control heater system.  Generally
speaking, the heater system stabilized the signals fairly well.  Some drift
is still apparent in the data set.  RSTB1 seemed to be the more stable of
the two units and is therefore recommended as the reference system for this
measurement.

In addition to their thermal sensitivity, the accuracy of the remote sensing
measurement is also dependent upon the total amount of water in the sensing
path.  In such a moist, marine environment this sensitivity appears as
an altitude dependence in the raw surface temperature.  Due to the flight
profiles, there was insufficient data to formulate a correction algorithm
to adjust for this problem.  Most of the flight tracks for this program were
conducted at low altitudes, so this problem is minimized in this particular
data set.

10.  The altitude of the aircraft was measured in several ways.
A pressure-based altitude (PALT,PALTF) is derived from the static pressure
using the hydrostatic equation and normally using the U.S. Standard
Atmosphere, which assumes a constant surface pressure of 1013 mbar and a mean
surface temperature of 288 oK.  Due to the tropical nature of the research
area for GOTEX, better results were obtained by using a mean surface
temperature of 305 oK.

The GPS also provides an altitude readout (GALT).  The military has removed
the electronic dithering of this signal that used to prevent its use by
research aircraft.  This output now provides a fairly accurate MSL latitude
based on a ellipsoid model of the Earth (WGS-84).  The signal recorded on the
C-130 can still be interrupted during steep turns.

A radar altimeter (HGM232) was onboard the aircraft for the project.  This
unit worked well and, due to the fact that most of the research was conducted
over a water surface, showed an excellent correlation with the GPS altitude.

To aid the Users in choosing a common altitude to use in their analyses, RAF
now calculates a "reference" altitude (GGALTC).  The output is based directly
upon GGALT and uses basic smoothing techniques to fill gaps with Inertial
altitude data when the GPS signal is interrupted.

11.  Two hot-wire liquid water sensors were mounted on the C-130 at the start
of the program.  One of the probes (PLWCC1) failed during the first flight.
As there were no "in-cloud" objectives for the project, the unit was not
replaced for the remainder of the experiment.  The remaining PMS King
Probe (PLWCC) worked well during the program, but the sensing elements
were susceptible to drift resulting from salt accumulations.

12.  The calculation of CN-sized aerosol-particle concentrations (CONCN) is
dependent upon total particle counts (CNTS) and the measurement of sample flow
(FCN, FCNC).  NOTE:  the internal sample flow (FCN) has been corrected (FCNC)
to ambient conditions, only, and not to STP for the calculation of particle
concentration.  NOTE: the length of the tubing connecting the inlet to the
counter will induce a 1-2 second lag in the system response to changes in
particle concentration.

13.  Four PMS particle probes (SPP100, SPP200, SPP300, 260X) were used on the
project.  Some specific details on each of the probes are summarized below:

    SPP100 - The SPP100 cloud droplet probe functioned
             extremely well. Weekly servicing and re-calibration of
             the sensor optics provided good documentation for data
             processing.  Being an optical scattering probe, the
             SPP100 has no way of distinguishing between aerosols,
             ice particles and water droplets. Therefore, the liquid
             water content calculated from this probe (PLWCF_IBR)
             should be used with caution in this application.

    SPP200 - The SPP200 aerosol particle probe functioned
             extremely well during the project.  The probe being
             flown has been modified in order to directly measure
             the sample flow through the instrument.  These data,
             recorded as PFLWC_WDL, have been used in the
             calculation of particle concentrations to provide a
             more accurate measurement of aerosol concentrations.
             Due to the sampling technique employed by this probe
             it is not suitable for use in clouds.  Counts in
             the lowest bin size were contaminated by excessive
             electronic noise.  Data from that channel have
             been removed from the calculation of total particle
             concentration (CONCP).

    SPP300 - The SPP300 aerosol probe covers a range of
             particle sizes that bridges the gap between the true
             aerosols and the smaller droplets (0.3 - 20 um).  Like
             all 1-D optical probes, however, the SPP300 has no way
             to distinguish between aerosols, ice or water.

             Note: The bin sizes vary significantly in the particle
             sizing routines for this probe.

     260X - While the range of this probe is specified to be 10 to 640 um
            in 10 um increments, it has some problems sampling the smaller
            sizes when mounted on an aircraft.  NCAR data processing uses
            the Baumgardner correction alogrithms (Baumgardner, Korolev,1997;
            Airspeed Corrections for Optical Array Probe Sample Volumes,
            JTECH, 14, 1224-1229) to correct the 260X data for these problems.
            Effectively this changes the range of the unit to 50 - 640 um when
            it is mounted on the C-130.  The unit functioned well throughout
            the program.

14.  The RAF is currently testing a small, inexpensive inertial reference
unit (CMIGITS) as a potential aircraft attitude backup system to the standard
Honeywell Laseref IRU.  While the unit was functional during the field
project, the data are not yet suitable for use in any of the derived wind
calculations.  The raw data have been included in the final data set at
the request of one of the Principle Investigators for use in their personal
research into the performance of similar systems.  No other use should
be made of these variables (CLAT, CLON, CPITCH, CROLL, CTHDG, CVEW,
CVNS, CVSPD, CALT).

15.  The trailing-cone static-pressure reference was only flown during
research flight RF11.  PCONE data are only valid for that flight.

16.  The RAF Giant Nuclei Impactor was only flown on flights RF02 and RF03.
The associated variables (XGN1, XGN2) are only valid for those flights.

17.  Virtually all measurements made on the aircraft require some sort
of airspeed correction, or the systems simply do not become active while
the aircraft remains on the ground.  None of the data collected while
the aircraft is on the ground should be considered as valid.

       *	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	



Section II:  Flight-by-Flight Summary


RF01  Radiometric temperature sensor not turned on at start of flight.
  OAT data bad from 144000 to 145605 CUT.
  Radar altimeter not turned on at start of flight.  HGM232 data
  bad from 144000 to 144307 CUT.
  Top ultra-violet radiometer producing intermittent signal during
  the flight.  UVT data bad for the entire flight.


RF02  Top ultra-violet radiometer producing intermittent signal during
  the flight.  UVT data bad for the entire flight.

RF03 Due to an on-board data system problem the data file starts in
  flight.  All data lost prior to 143832 CUT.

RF04  Radar altimeter not turned on at start of flight.  HGM232 data
  bad from 142600 to 143310 CUT.

RF05  Loose hardware in right pod DSM cause an on-board data system
  problem.  All data lost after 214600 CUT.

RF06  A mechanical problem with the aircraft caused the termination of
  this research flight prior to the aircraft's entry into the
  research area.
  Air chemistry sensors turned off prior to landing.  TEO3C data
  bad after 144700 CUT.

RF08  Air chemistry sensors turned off prior to landing.  TEO3C data
  bad after 175900 CUT.

RF09  Radiometric temperature sensor not turned on at start of flight.
  OAT data bad from 142700 to 143030 CUT.
  Top dew point sensor balanced in flight.  DPT and DPTC data bad
  from 205755 to 210005 CUT.

RF11  Radiometric temperature sensor intentionally not turned on at
  start of flight.  OAT data bad for the entire flight.
  Air chemistry sensors turned off prior to landing.  TEO3C data
  bad after 195650 CUT.
  Data system failure in flight led to a gap in the data recording.
  All data missing from 193552 to 193929 CUT.


       *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *
